     A. GEN, CONF. LIBRARY
     BATTLE CREW MICE.

-4    ......aedPiErgrargEEM



     ,IBBATH-SGHOOL IONS




11   TESTAMEM HUTORY
                  FOR


         SENIOR CLASSES.


               ---..--`>4-'--             i

      J71ATU74RY TO JULY, 188,9.
                                          12j


            PRICE 10 CENTS.

                                •


        • PUBLISHED BY THE
 ERNATIONAL SABBATH-SCHOOL ASSOCIATION,
            OAKLAND, CAL,.
                1889.
                    VALUABLE
                                     TO


 Hible Study.
46  OACRED CHRONOLOGY" is a new and revised edition of a little
    1.3 work published by S. Bliss about forty years ago, giving the chronol-
        ogy from creation till the death of the apostle John. The peculiar and
valuable feature of this work is that the chronology is established by the
Scripture itself. The chronology of the history of the kings of Israel and
Judah, as given in Kings and Chronicles, is often a perplexity to the Bible
student. In this work the subject is relieved of all difficulty. The subject
is made so plain that it can be very easily understood.
     "THE PEOPLING OF THE EARTH" is a series of historical
notes on the tenth chapter of Genesis. It gives an outline of the origin and
descent of all the principal nations of the earth—the Greeks, the Romans,
the Scotch, the Irish, the Welsh, the English, the Germans, the Scandina-
vians, the Russians, the Chinese, etc., etc. It forms an excellent introduc-
tion to universal history.
     This little book is just the thing for Bible students everywhere—in col-
lege, in Sabbath-school, and in the home. Send for a copy; you will find
it invaluable.

              READ WHAT OTHERS SAY.
                       [From the Christian at Work.]
     "Thislittle book is just the thing for Bible students everywhere."
                           [From Zion's Herald.]
      'The peculiar and valuable feature of this work is that the chronology
is established by the words of the Scripture itself. This is a most valuable
work."
                        [From the American Baptist.]
   . . . "The second part of the volume is devoted to an exposition of
Genesis Da, in the light of the world's history, and is a valuable compen-
dium of the genesis of history, the various peoples and nations of the earth.
The whole work is thus one of value to the student and may be used to ad-
vantage in comparisons and investigations."
                          [From the Golden Censer.]
     "To close students of the Bible this book will prove very interesting."
                             [From the Advance.]
     "It is based wholly on Scripture, and solves in a clear way many per-
plexing questions."
     The book contains 30o pages, and is neatly bound and furnished in
styles and at prices given below.
                 Cloth                                    $x cxy
                 Library                                   x 5o
                 Venetian Morocco, gilt edges.             I 75
     Sent post-paid on receipt of price. Address orders to
                PACIFIC PRESS PUBLISHING CO.,
                                 Oakland, California.
OLD TESTSMENT HISTORY,
             LESSON I.
                   JANUARY 5, 1889.

            SHRINKING FROM DUTY.

     I. UNDER what circumstances did the Lord
appear to Moses at Horeb? Ex. 3 : i-6.
     2. For what purpose did the Lord appear to
him ? Verses 7-10.
     3. By what name did the Lord say he would be
known ? Verses 13-15.
     4. What is the significance of this name? Ans.
--,-The One who is; the self-existent and eternal
One.
    '5. What similar terms do we find in the New
Testament? Rev. I : 4; Heb. 13 : 8.
     6. What sign was given to Moses, by which the
Israelites might know that the Lord had appeared
to him? Ex. 4: 1-5.
     7. What additional sign was given? Verses
6, 7.
     8. What further sign was Moses to give in case
the Israelites should not believe the first two?
Verse g.
     9. What excuse did Moses then make? Verse
1o.
  1o. What rebuke and encouragement did the
Lord give him? Verses II, 12.
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTOPY.


     t. What reply did Moses make? Verse 13,
see margin.
   12. With what did Moses thus indirectly charge
God? See note.
   13. How did the Lord regard this? Verse 14,
first clause.
   14. What further encouragement did he give
Moses ? Verses 14-16.
   15. What practical lesson may we learn from
this occurrence? See note.
                      NOTES.
   WHEN Moses said to the Lord, " Send, I pray
thee, by the hand of him whom thou shouldst
send," he indirectly charged God with not know-
ing whom he ought to send. If the Lord had not
seen that Moses was the best man for the place, he
would not have selected him. While God doe's
not want a man to run when he has not been sent
(see Jer. 23: 21), he does want a man to go when
he sends him. If God indicates that he wants a
man to do a certain work, that is sufficient evidence
that he will sustain him in that work. It is a ter-
rible thing to refuse to obey the Lord. To beg off
from labor to which one has been appointed, is not
always humility. It may. be an evidence of pride
or stubbornness. This case under consideration
may naturally call to the minds of many the case
of Jonah, although Jonah was not like Moses ex-
cept in that he did not want to do what the Lord
wanted him to do. The motives of the two men
were different. The teacher, however, who ex-
hausts the lesson before the allotted time has ex-
pired, will do well to call attention to the case of
 Jonah, and of others that come to his mind, as
different phases of this shrinking from duty.
            OLD TES'rAm.g.,V7. HISTORY. .

   VERY often people who plead inability to do a
certain work in the church or Sabbkh-school, to
which they are called, think that their refusal is an
evidence of their humility, when, in fact, it is an
evidence of nothing but pride. They fear that if
they should take hold of it, they might make mis-
takes; and that •people might not think so much of
them in consequence.. And so, in order to avoid
possible criticism by men, they are content to be
drones, and to risk the displeasure of God. That
is one of the worst kinds of pride


             LESSON Hs
                    JANUARY 12, 1889.

            RESISTING THE TRUTH.

    I. WHEN Moses and Aaron delivered their mes-
sage to Pharaoh, what answer did they get? Ex.
5 : 1, 2.
    2. Of what did Pharaoh accuse them? Verses
4, 5.
    3. What additional burden was placed on the
Israelites in consequence? Verses 6-9.
    4. When Moses the second time repeated God's
promise to the Israelites, how did they receive his
words? Ex. 6 : 9.
    5. How did this make Moses feel about going
again before Pharaoh ? Verse 12.
    6. What assurance did the Lord give him? Ex.
7: I.
        What was meant by this? Ex. 7: 2; 4 : 16.
    8. What was Moses told to do when Pharaoh
should ask for a miracle? Ex. 7 : 9.
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.

      9. When this miracle was performed, What did
Pharaoh's sorcerers do? Verses io—i 2.
    io. What manifestation of God's power followed
this act of the magicians? Verse 12, last clause.
   11. What effect did the rejection of this evidence
have upon Pharaoh? Verse 13, see Revised Ver-
sion.
   12. What were Moses and Aaron told to do
next? Verse 19.
    13. What was the result? Verses zo, 21.
    14. What destroyed the effect of this miracle
upon Pharaoh ? Verse 22.
    15. What plague was next threatened, if the
king should refuse to let the people go? Ex. 8:
 I, 2.
    16. Was this done? Verses 5, 6.
    17. How severe was this plague? Verses 3, 4, 6.
    18. What did the magicians do? Verse 7.
    19. What request and promise did Pharaoh then
make? Verse' 8.
    20. Why did not his magicians and sorcerers
remove the plague? See note.
    21. What is a magician ? 'Ans.—"One skilled
in magic; one who practices the black art; an en-
chanter, a necromancer; a sorcerer or sorceress."
— Webster. See also definition of " magic."
    22. What: is sorcery? Ans.—" Divination by
the assistance or supposed assistance of evil spirits;
or the power of commanding evil spirits; magic;
?S,i'nantment; witchcraft."— Webster. See also
 definition of "witchcraft" and "enchantment."
     23. Whom did the heathen worship? i Cor.
I0 : 20.
           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.               5

   24. Then on whose side were Pharaoh and his
magicians?
   25. What does the Bible say is Satan's sole
work? f Pet. 5:8.
                Concluded next week.)
                       NOTES.
   IF in our version the word "Jehovah" were al-
lowed to appear wherever it does in the corre-
sponding place in the Hebrew, the sense would
often appear more clearly. "Jehovah" is the dis-
tinctive title of the one true God. Paul says,
"There be gods many, and lords many; but to us
there is but one God.' He is the one who made all
things, and who exists by his own power. This
God, Pharaoh did not know. When Moses and
Aaron said, "Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Is-
rael, Let my people go," he rudely exclaimed,
"Who is Jehovah, that I should obey his voice to
let Israel go ? I know not Jehovah, neither will I
let Israel go." If Moses had said, as our version
indicates, " Thus saith the Lord," it would not
have been distinctive, for the sun-god, which Pha-
raoh worshiped, corresponded to the Canaanitish
Baal, which means "lord." Pharaoh knew many
lords and gods, and one above all, the sun-god,
which was known as "the lord;" he kne* Ra,
and Osiris, and Isis, and Phthah, and Set, but he
did not know Jehovah, the only Lord. He might
have known God, but, like the other heathen, he
did not like to retain God in his knowledge. Still
 God gave him this opportunity to know and to
 recognize him; and when Pharaoh haughtily said,
 "I know not Jehovah," the Lord brought judg-
 ments upon him until he was forced to confess his
 power.

  "AND the king of Egypt said unto them, Where-
fore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


their works ? " The word " let" is • used in its
primitive sense of hindering, or causing to cease.
That this is so, is showri by the next verse, where
the king continues, " Behold, the people of the land
now are many, and ye make them rest from their
burdens." Whatever opinion may be held as to
the reason, this much is certain, that in consequence
of the coming of Moses and Aaron, and what they
had said, the Israelites had to some extent ceased
from their work. This is still further shown by the
fact that Pharaoh said of them, "They be idle"
(verse 8), and to them, "Ye are idle, ye are idle"
(verse 17). It was because of this that the king
increased their task, compelling them to make
brick without straw.

   To the Jews Jesus once said, " Yet a little While
is the light with you. Walk while ye have the
light, lest darkness come upon you." John i 2 : 35.
Nothing is more evident than that when a person
turns away from light he goes into darkness.
Light and darkness are opposite conditions, so that
if a man is not in the light he is in the dark. That
proposition needs no argument. It was on this
principle that Pharaoh's heart was hardened. Am-
ple evidence of the superiority of God's power over
that of Satan, as exhibited through the magicians,
was given to Pharaoh, but when he refused to ac-
cept it, that very rejection was a hardening of his
heart. The light which, if it were accepted, would
acquaint him with God, was rejected, and by thus
shutting himself farther away from sod, hardness
of heart and blindness of mind necessarily followed.
For this no one was to blame but Pharaoh himself.
The Revised Version renders Ex. 7:9 thus: "And
Pharaoh's heart was hardened."

, THE only reason that can be given why the
magicians did Pot remove the plague of frogs, is
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.                 7

that they could not. That they would gladly have
done everything in their power to destroy the ef-
fect of the miracle upon the mind of Pharaoh, and
to make him believe that the power that was with
Moses was no greater than that with them, there
is no reason to doubt. It is most reasonable, also,
to conclude that as the king had called the magi-
cians to his assistance for the purpose of withstand-
ing Moses, he would first call upon them to remove
the plague. But they could not. The fact that
Pharaoh was obliged to call upon Moses and Aaron
to remove the plague, was an additional humiliation,
and emphasized. the fact that the power that was
with them was greater than that power that was
with the magicians.


           LESSIEIN III.
                    JANUARY 19, 1889.
            RESISTING THE TRUTH.

                  (Concluded.)
    I. RELATE what we have already learned of
the work of Pharaoh's magicians.
    2. What have we learned that they could not
do?
    3. What was the second plague that was Brought
on the land of Egypt?
    4. When this plague was stayed, did Pharaoh
keep his promise? Ex. 8 : I2-15.
    5. What was the next plague? Verses i6, 17.
    6. Could the magicians repeat this miracle?
Verse i8.
    7. What were they forced to acknowledge to
Pharaoh? Verse 19, first part,
8          OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


    8. In so saying, what did they virtually admit
concerning their own work ?
    9. What does Paul say will be the character of
men in the last days ? 2 Tim. 3 : 1-4.
   Io. Among what people will this wickedness ex-
ist? Verse 5.
    1. What will this sort of people do? Verses
6, 7.
   12. How will they resist the truth? Verse 8.
   13. What other prophecy have we of miracles
to be wrought for the purpose of deceiving? Rev.
13 : 13, 14.
   14. What did the Saviour say on this point?
Matt. 24 : 24.
   15. By what agency are these lying miracles
wrought ? Rev. 16 : 14.
   i6. What name is given to those who in this age
do the work which the ancient magicians and sor-
cerers did? - Ans.—Spiritualist mediums.
   17. Is there now any indication that the decep-
tions of Spiritualism will find a place among those
who profess godliness? See notes.
   18. What does Paul say of those who shall resist
the truth by their lying wonders? 2 Tim. 3 :9.
   19. How was the folly of Pharaoh's magicians
made manifest? Ex. 8 : 18, 19; 9 :1o, II.
                      NOTES.
   IT is evident that wherever the principles of
Spiritualism are held, whatever manifestations may
accompany it will sooner or later be accepted.
That almost the whole professedly Christian world
is fast getting.into a position to readily receive
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.                  9

of heavenly origin all the deceptions of Spiritualism,
is evident from the following extracts, which show
how universally the principles of modern Spir-
itualism are held.
    In the month ,of September, 1885, Monsignor
Capel, the celebrated Roman Catholic propagandist,
delivered a lecture in San Francisco, concerning
Spiritualism, of which the S. F. Chronicle, of Sep-
tember 7, gave a report, in which it was said:—
    " Monsignor Capel denied that he had ex-
pressed a disbelief in Spiritualism. He had sim-
ply left out of the category of possible supernatural
manifestations all biological phenomena. Aside
from these, Spiritualism was • but a misrepresenta-
tion of Catholic teaching, and it had been in the
world from the beginning.'
    He said, further, that to Catholics the spirit
world was as clear as the light of a gas jet; that the
dead were but disembodied spirits, with whom they
were• in daily communication, and to whom they
prayed. Thus the great Roman Catholic Church
 is essentially atone with Spiritualism.
    The Sunday School Times of August 29, 1885,
had a long editorial entitled, " What Our Dead Do
for Us," in which the following occurred, among
 much more of the same nature:-7
    " Much of the best work of the world is done
 through the present, personal influence of the dead.
 . . . As a practical fact, and as a great spiritual
 truth, our dead do for us as constantly and as va-
 riously as they could do for us if they were still
 here in the flesh; and they do for us very much
 that they could not do unless they were dead."
     " Our living friends do much for us, but perhaps
 our dead friends do yet more."
    The New York Christian Advocate of September
8, 1887, contained an article on the death of Dr,
 Daniel Curry, in which it was said;
10           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


   " But he is not gone. We will not . say. Good-
bye' to him. We will keep him among us still.
Reserve that,seat in the front pew of the conference.
Let the old place be kept sacred. He was not the
man to leave his friends. In the thick battle, in
the time of danger or holy communion, in the
solemn hour of crisis, he will be there. 'Are they
not ministering spirits ? ' "
   The Christian Union of November 3, 1887, con-
tained a sermon preached by Dr. Henry M. Field
(Presbyterian) at Cornell University, in which he
said:—
   " Oh, may the dead ever be with us, walking by
our side, taking us by the hand, smoothing the
cares from the troubled brow, and pointing us up-
ward to the regions of everlasting light and peace."
   Many similar passages could be quoted from rep-
resentatives of all denominations.

   THE folly of Pharaoh's magicians was made mani-
fest by their inability to counterfeit all the miracles
which Moses performed. So, says Paul, it will be
with the last-day wonder-workers. Satan, through
his agents, as well as in person, will " show great
signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were pos-
sible, they shall deceive the very elect." Matt.
24: 24. The miracles which in the past have been
given as proof of the power of God, and the signs
of the coming of the Lord, will be counterfeited.
But they will be cut short in their deceptive career,
by mighty wonders which will strike terror to their
hearts. The mountains and islands will be moved
out of their places, the earth shall be turned " up-
side down," the heavens shall depart as a scroll
when it is rolled together, and as the deceivers
vainly seek for the rocks to hide them from the
face of Him that sitteth upon the throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb, they will be forced to ac.
knowledge that "this is the finger of God,"
            OL.D TESTAMENT HISTOR Y.             IL


          ;LESSON IV.
                   JANUARY 26, 1889.
        GOD'S CARE FOR HIS PEOPLE.

     I. WHAT was the fourth plague that came upon
the land of Egypt? Ex. 8 :20, 21, 24.
     2. What remarkable proof of his power did the
Lord give? Verses 22, 23.
     3. When Pharaoh still refused to let the people
go, what plague was threatened? Ex. 9 :1-3.
     4. Did the cattle of the children of Israel suf-
fer? Verses 4-7.
     5. What was the sixth plague? Verses 8-1o.
     6. What was threatened as the seventh plague?
Verse 22.
     7. How terrible was this plague? Verses 23-25.
     8. Was there anything that was not destroyed
by the hail? Verse 32.
     9. How did God again show his power, and his
 care for his people? Verse 26.
    1o. When Pharaoh again broke his promise to
 let the people go, what did the Lord threaten?. Ex.,
 10:4, 5.
      f. How severe was this plague ? Verses 13-15.
    12. What was the ninth plague? Verses 21-23.
    13. 'What showed in a special manner that this
 darkness was not from ordinary causes ? Verse 23.
    14. What was the tenth and last plague threat-
 ened? Ex. 11: 4-6.
    15. How did the Lord propose to show that he
 put • a difference between the Egyptians and
 i§r49lius ? Verse 7,
12           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


                         NOTES.
   THE first miracle, while it authenticated the mis-
sion of Moses, destroyed the serpents, which
among the Egyptians were objects of worship,
 thus evincing, in the outset, that their gods could
 neither help the people nor save themselves.
   The second miracle was directed against the river
 Nile, another object which they regarded with relig;
ious reverence. This river they held sacred, as the
 Hindoos do the Ganges; and even the fish in its
waters they revered as objects of worship. They
drank the water with reverence and delight, and
supposed that a divine efficacy dwelt in its waves
to heal diseases of the body. The water of this,
their cherished object of idolatrous homage, was
transmuted to blood; •and its finny idols became a
mass of putridity.
   The third 'miracle was directed to the 'accom-
plishment of the same end—the destruction of faith
in the river as an object of worship. The waters
of the Nile were caused to send forth legions of
frogs, which infested the whole land, and became a
nuisance and a torment to the people. Thus their
idol, by the power of the true God, was polluted,
and turned into a source of pollution to its wor-
shipers.
   By the fourth miracle of a series constantly in-
creasing in power and severity, lice came upon man
and beast throughout the land. " Now if it be re-
membered," says Glieg, " that no one could ap-
proach the altars of Egypt upon whom so impure
an insect harbored; and that the priests, to guard
against the slightest risk of contamination, wore
only linen garments, and shaved their heads and
bodies every day,* the severity of this miracle as a
judgment upon Egyptian idolatry may be imagined.
Whilst it lasted, no act of worship could be per-
 *Every third day according to Hcrodotn,
            OLD 7'ESTAMENT IILSTORY.              13

formed, and so keenly was this felt that the very
magicians exclaimed, ' This is the finger of God.' "
   The fifth miracle was designed to destroy the
trust of the people in Beelzebub, or the Fly-god,-
who was- reverenced as their protector from visita-
tions of swarms of ravenous flies which infested
the land, generally about the time of the dog-days,
and removed only, as they supposed, at the will of
this idol. The miracle now wrought by Moses
evinced the impotence of Beelzebub, and caused
the people to look elsewhere for relief from the fear-
ful visitation under which they were suffering.
   The sixth miracle, which destroyed the cattle ex-
cepting those of the Israelites, was aimed at the
destruction of the entire system of brute worship.
This system, degrading and bestial as it was, had
become a monster of many heads in Egypt. They
had their sacred bull, and ram, and heifer, and 'goat,
and many others, all of which were destroyed by
the agency of the God of Moses. Thus by one act
of power Jehovah manifested his own supremacy,
and destroyed the very existence of their brute
idols.
   Of the peculiar fitness of the sixth plague (the
seventh miracle) says the writer before quoted, the
reader will receive a better impression when he is
reminded that in Egypt there were several altars
upon which human sacrifices were occasionally
offered, when they desired to propitiate Typhon, or
the Evil Principle. These victims being burned
alive, their ashes were gathered together by the
officiating priests, and thrown up into the air, in
order that evil might be averted from every place
to which an atom of the ashes was wafted. By the
direction of Jehovah, Moses took a handful of
ashes from the furnace (which, very probably, the
 Egyptians at this time had frequently used to turn
aside the plagues with which they were smitten) and
 he cast it into the air, as they were accustomed to
14             OLD TESTA A! T          irsroA'

do; and instead of averting evil, boils and blains
fell upon all the people of the land. Neither king,
 nor priest, nor people, escaped. Thus the bloody
rites of Typhon became a curse to the idolaters—
the supremacy of Jehovah was affirmed, and the
deliverance of the Israelites insisted upon.
   The ninth miracle was directed against the wor-
ship of Serapis, whose peculiar office was supposed
to be to protect the country from locusts. At pe-
riods these destructive insects came in clouds upon
the land, and like an overshadowing curse they
blighted the fruits of the field and the verdure of
the forest. At the command of Moses these terri-
ble insects came—and they retired only at his bid-
ding. Thus was the impotence of Serapis made
manifest, and the idolaters taught the folly of trust-
ing in any other protection than that of Jehovah,
the God of Israel.
   The eighth and tenth miracles were directed
against the worship of Isis and Osiris, to whom, and
the river Nile, they awarded the first place* in the
long catalogue of their idolatry. These idols were
originally the representatives of the sun and moon;
they were believed to control the light and the ele-
ments; and their worship prevailed in some form
among all the early nations. The miracles directed
against the worship of Isis and Osiris must have
made a deep impression- on the minds both of the
Israelites and the Egyptians. In a country where
rain seldom falls—where the atmosphere is always
calm, and the light of the heavenly bodies always
continued, what was the horror pervading ail minds
during the elemental war described in the Hebrew
record!—during the long period of three days and
   *Against the worship of the Nile two miracles were di-
rected, and two, likewise, against Isis and Osiris, because they
were suppoied to be the supreme gods. Many placed the Nile
first, as they said it had power to water Egypt independently of
the action of the elements.
            OLD TESTAMENT' HISTORY:              15

three nights, while the gloom of thiCk darkness
settled, like the outspread pall of death, over the
whole land! Jehovah of hosts summoned nature'
to proclaim him the true God; the God of, Israel
asserted his supremacy, and exerted his power to
degrade the idols, destroy idolatry, and liberate
the descendants of Abraham from the land of their
bondage.
  The Almighty having thus revealed himself as
the true God, by miraculous agency, and pursued
those measures, in the exercise of his power, which
were directly adapted to destroy the various forms
of idolatry which existed in Egypt, the eleventh and
last miracle was a judgment, in order to manifest to
all minds that Jehovah was the God who executed
judgment in the earth.—Philosophy of the Plan of
Salvation.


            LESSON
                   FEBRUARY 2, 1889.

         GOD'S CARE FOR HIS PEOPLE.

                    (Concluded.)
   I. TELL, in their order, what plagues were
brought upon the land of Egypt because Pharaoh
would "not let Israel go?
   2. State the particulars of how God discrimi-
nated between his people and the Egyptians?
   3. What was the last plague ? Ex. i i :4-6.
   4. How safe were the Israelites to be? Verse 7.
   5. Before this plague was inflicted, what instruc-
tion did the Lord give his people? Ex. 12:I—to.
   6. What was this feast declared to be? Verse
16           OLD T.R.SP.AMEHT HISTORY.


    7. What were they to do with the blood of the
lamb? Verses 21, 22.
    8. Why were they to do this? Verses 13, 23.
    9. What did this simple act indicate ? Ans. —
Faith in God.
   to. What took place at midnight? Ex. I2: 29,
3o.
    1. What part of the previous record warrants
us in believing that the Egyptians might have
availed themselves of the protection afforded the
Israelites ? Ex. 9: 20, 21.
   12. Of what was the lamb whose sprinkled blood
saved the Israelites from death, a type ? I Cor. 5 : 7.
   13. From what are we saved by His blood ?
Rom. 5: 8, 9 ; Gal. I :4.
   14. Just before God's people are finally delivered
from this evil world, what will come upon the earth ?
Rev. 15: 1; 16:1.
   15. Which of the seven last plagues will be sim-
ilar to the plagues upon Egypt ? See Rev. 16.
   16. Mention some of the things that are said as
to the trouble of that day ? Dan. 12: I; Isa. 2: 20,
21; 13:6, 7, 9; 24: 1, 3-6, 17-21.
   17. What distinction will God then put between
his servants and the wicked ? Ps. 91: I-1o.

            LESSON VI_
                    FEBRUARY 9, 1889.

       HARDENING PHARAOH'S HEART.

   I. WHEN the Lord sent Moses to Egypt, what
did he say that he knew of Pharaoh ? • Ex. 3: 19,
margin.
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.              17 •

    2. What did he say he would have to do
before Pharaoh would relent? Verse 20.
    3. Then what was Pharaoh's natural disposition ?
Ans.—Stubborn and self-willed; hard and unyield-'
ing.
     4. Afterward, what did the Lord tell Moses he
would do to Pharaoh ? Ex. 7: 3.
     5, What did he say that Pharaoh's stubborn-
ness would give him an opportunity to do ? Verses
4, 5.
     6. What first tended to harden Pharaoh's heart?
Verses io-13.
     7. What again confirmed him in his stubborn-
ness ? Verses 20-22. .
     8. Through whose power did the magicians re-
sist the truth, and strengthen the king's evil pur-
 pose ?
     9. What first caused Pharaoh's determination
 to weaken ? Ex. 8: 8..
    To. When the Lord granted him this favor, what
 was the result ? Verses 12-15.
    it. Did the next plague have any effect on the
 king ? Verses '7-19.                          •
   12. When the plague of flies came, how was he
 affected ? Verses 24-28.
   13. When favor was again shown him, what was
 the result? Verses 30-32.
    14. How was Pharaoh affected by the next two
 plagues ? Ex. 9: 6, 7, 10-12.
    15. After Pharaoh had so often hardened his
 heart, what did the Lord do ? Verse 12.
    16. What was the seventh plague? Verses 23-
18          OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


  17. How did this terrible plague affect the king?
Verses 27, 28.
  18. Was his request granted? Verse 33.
  19. What did this favor lead Pharaoh to mani-
fest still more ? Verses 34, 35.
   20. When the terrible plague of locusts was sent,
what request, confession, and promise did the
king make? Ex. 1o: 16, 17.
   2i. Did the Lord grant his request? Verse 19.
   22. What did the Lord again do to Pharaoh,
even by this act of kindness? Verse 20.
   23. In all this record, what special thing is it
that had the effect of hardening Pharaoh's heart?
Ans.—The rejection of light from God. See notes.
   24. With what scripture is this in harmony?
Isa. 26 : 1o.
   25. What is it that makes wicked persons more
settled in their determination to sin? Eccl. 8 :it.
  26. After the sixth plague, what did the Lord
say was the reason he had preserved Pharaoh for
so long a time? Ex. 9: 55, i6. See note.
   27. When God's judgments are in the land,
for what purpose is it ? Isa. 26 :9.

                      NOTES.

   GOD knows the hearts of all men (Acts 15 : 8;
John 2 : 25), and so he knew the full stubborn-
ness of Pharaoh's nature before he sent Moses to
him. Nevertheless he gave Pharaoh ample op-
portunity to receive the knowledge of God. At
first God manifested his power to Pharaoh by
simple miracles. But the king rejected this evi-
dence, and not only allowed but invited the devil
             OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.                19

to destroy its force. Then the Lord began to
bring judgments upon Pharaoh, and made himself
known in a more marked manner; but still the
king's stubborn heart willfully rejected light, even
after his magicians—the agents of the deyil—had
confessed their own impotence, and the power of
God. By this means Pharaoh hardened his own
heart so much that it was impossible for him to see
light. He was in the condition of those of whom
Paul speaks when he says:—
    " But if our gospel be hid it is hid to them that
are lost; in whom the god of this world hath
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest
the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is
"the image of God, should shine unto them." 2
 Cor. 4 : 3, 4.
    Then God proceeded to harden his heart still
 more. Paul says of the heathen in generAl, who
 were wholly corrupt, that, " even as they did not
 like _to retain God in their knowledge, God gave
 them over to a mind void of judgment, to do those
 things that are not convenient." Rom. i : 28,
 margin. So of those in the last days who willfully
 reject light, he says that "for this cause God shall
 send them strong delusion, that they should believe
 a lie; that they all might be damned who believe
 not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness."
 2 Thess. 2:11, 12.
    God always lets men have just what they are
 determined to have. If they hunger and thirst
 after righteousness, he will fill them with it; but if
 they fortify themselves in stubbornness, resist the
 strivings of his Spirit, and are bound to have their
  own evil way, then his Spirit ceases to strive with
 them, and he lets them have darkness to the full.
  Of those who hate knowledge, and despise God's
  reproof, he says: "Therefore shall they eat of the
  fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own
20          OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


devices. For the turning away of the simple shall
slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy
them." Prov. 1 :31, 32.

   THE bearing of this lesson upon the doctrine of
a future probation is obvious. In this life God
gives to every man ample opportunity to know him,
and to accept his salvation. The true Light
" lighteth every man that cometh into the world."
John I : 9. The rejection of this Light leaves the
man in darkness. The light tends to soften and
subdue his heart; the rejection of it hardens his
heart. After a man has deliberately rejected light,
and hardened his heart, additional light and favor
only harden his heart the more. So then if, after
this life, God should grant man another probation,
it would tend, not to his salvation, but to increase
his wickedness, and would thus be useless. So it
is that if favor be shown to the wicked, his wicked-
ness will not depart from him; and yet in the favor
of God there is life, and it is his goodness that
leads to repentance all who do repent. The same
thing which saves some destroys others, according
to the way in which they receive it, just as the
same sun which melts wax hardens clay.



          :LESSON VII_
                   FEBRUARY x6, 1889.

        THE DEPARTURE FROM EGYPT.

   I. WHAT was the last plague upon Egypt ?
   2. What were the Israelites required to do in
order to escape it ?
   3. On what day of the month was the Passover?
Ex. 12: 6.
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTO.2317.            21

    4. At what time in the night were the first-born
slain ? Verse 29.
    5. When this great calamity came, what did
Pharaoh do ? Verses 30-32.
    6. Of what word of the Lord was this a fulfill-
ment ? Ex. II: 1.
    7. How did the people of Egypt feel ? Ex.
12:33.                     •
    8. What did the Israelites receive from the
Egyptians ? Verses 35, 36. See note.
    9. With what word of the Lord was this in
harmony? Ex. 3: 22; Gen. 15: 13, 14.
   Io. Explain the seeming discrepancy between
Gen. 15: 13 and Ex. 12: 40. See note.
       How large a company went out from Egypt?
Ex. 12: 37.
  12. What did Moses take with him ? Ex. 13:
19. See Gen. 5o: 24, 25.
  13. In exacting this promise, ho Lhat was Joseph
actuated? Heb. 11: 22.
                                 1
  14. What precaution did the, ..ord take against
causing the Israelites to bectuie discouraged ?
Ex. 13: 17, 18.
  15. What protection and guidance did he give
them? Verses 21, 22.
  16. What confidence may God's people ever
have? Ps. 34: 7; 125: I, 2.
  17. Then what should ever be their song ? Isa.
12:2.
  18. What sustained Moses all through the con-
test with Pharaoh, and the departure from Egypt ?
Heb. II: 27, 28.
2f.1        OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


                       NOTES.
    "AND they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels
of silver, and jewels of gold; and raiment."
Ex. 12: 35. It may be noticed, in passing, that
the word rendered " jewels " more properly signi-
fies " vessels," " instruments," etc. But the ob-
ject of this note is to disabuse the minds of any of
the idea that the Israelites, according to the word
of God, borrowed from the Egyptians that which
they knew there was no possibility of repaying.
They did not borrow these things, but demanded
them, as the Hebrew word indicates. The Hebrew
word here rendered " borrowed " is the same that
is rendered " require " in Deut. io: 12: "And
now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require
of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in
all his ways," etc. Here, it will be readily 'seen,
the idea is not of asking something which should
be returned, but of asking that which is justly
due. So it is in Ex. I2: 35. The Revised Ver-
sion has it, " They asked Of the Egyptians."
The Israelites had been working for the Egyptians
for many years, without compensation. They had
added immensely to the wealth of Egypt (see Ex.
I; I I); indeed, the Egyptians owed their very ex-
istence under God, to the Hebrews, for if it had
not been for the wise counsel and vigorous action
of Joseph, they would have perished 'by famine.
And now, when the Israelites were about to leave,
they demanded of their former oppressors some
little compensation; and the Lord had so moved
upon the hearts of the Egyptians that they could
not refuse. Just as his judgments had made them
willing to let the Israelites go, so they had made
them willing to pay something of what they justly
owed. Dr. Clarke says that our common English
version is almost the only transgressor in represent-
ing the Israelites as borrowing; that the Septuagint,
the Vulgate, -the Samaritan, the Coptic, and the
             OLD TESTAMENT IIISTORY.               28

Persian, are the same as the Hebrew, and that
the European versions are generally correct.

   GEN. 15: ig says: " Know of a surety that thy
seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs,
and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them
four hundred years." Ex. 12: 4o says: " Now the
sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in
Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years." Mark
that this latter text does not say that the children of
Israel dwelt in Egypt four hundred and thirty
years; but that the sojourning of the children of
Israel, "who dwelt in Egypt," was so long. Their
sojourning was not alone in Egypt, but in Canaan,
as Paul says of Abraham: " By faith he sojourned
in the land of promise, as in a strange country,
dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the
heirs with him of the same promise." Heb. II: 9.
And in harmony with this is the reading of the
Samaritan Pentateuch, and the Alexandrian copy
of the Septuagint, which are believed to exhibit the
most correct copy of the five books of Moses.
They read thus:—
   " Now the sojourning of the children of Israel,
and of their fathers, which they sojourned in the
land of Canaan, and in the land of Egypt, was four
hundred and thirty years."
   This four hundred and thirty years of sojourning
dates from the promise to Abraham; for Paul speaks
of the giving of the law, which was immediately
after the thliverance from Egypt, as four hundred
and thirty years after the promise. Gal. 3: 17, 18.
 But while the sojourning was four hundred and
 thirty years, the affliction was only four hundred
 years. Gen. 15:13; Acts 7:6. Therefore, since
 the four hundred and thirty years of sojourn began
 with the giving of the promise, the affliction must
 have begun thirty years after the promise; and this
 was when Isaac was about five years old, for he was
24           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


not born until twenty-five years, after the promise.
Compare Gen. 12: 1-4 and 2I 5. So the affliction
dates from the time when Ishmael mocked Isaac
(Gen. 21:9, to), for Paul refers to this as the per-
secution of him that was born after ,the Spirit, by
him that was born after the flesh.



         'LESSON
                   FEBRUARY 23, 1889.


           CROSSING THE RED SEA.


     I. WHEN the king of Egypt found that the Is-
raelites had actually gone, how did he feel ? Ex.
14 : 5.
     2. What did he do ? Verses 6, 7.
    3. Had the Lord foretold this action on the part
of Pharaoh ? Verses 1-4.
     4. Where did Pharaoh and his army overtake
tb Israelites ? Verse 9.
     5. When. the Israelites saw the Egyptians, how
did hey feel ? Verse io.
     6 How did they show their lack of faith in
God?• Verses II, 12.
     7. What words of courage did Moses speak ?
Verses 13, 14.
    8. What did the Lord say to him? Verses
15, i6.
     9. What did he say that the Egyptians would
do? Verse 17.
   to. How did the Lord protect the Israelites
through the:night ? Verses 19, 20,
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.             25

  II. What way of escape did he prepare for them ?
Verses 21, 22, 29; Ex. 15:8.
   12. When the Egyptians followed them into the
sea, what did the Lord do? Ex. 14:23-28; 15:
9, 10.
   13. What was it that enabled the Israelites to
cross the sea ? Heb. I I : 29.
   14. What effect did this deliverance have upon
the people of Israel? Ex. 14:30, 31.,
   15. After such exhibitions of God's power and
his care for them, ought they ever to have feared
again ?
   16. Why were all these things written ? Rom.
15:4.
   17. What song did Moses and the children of ,
Israel sing after their deliverance. Read Ex. 15:
1-21.
   18. After the seven last plagues are poured upon
the wicked, what song will the delivered sing?
 Rev. 15: 2, 3.
   19. Repeat the substance of this song. Rev.
 15:3, 4•


           LESSON IX.
                    MARCH 2, 1889.
            THE GIVING OF MANNA.

    I. WHAT inconvenience did the children of
Israel suffer soon after they crossed the Red Sea ?
Ex. 15 : 23.
    2. How did they act? Verse '24. .
26            OLD TESTAMENT' HISTORY'.


      3. How did the Lord give them relief? Verse
25.
    4. What promise did the Lord then give the
people? Verse 26.
    5. When they came to the Wilderness of Sin,
what wicked charge did they bring against Moses
and Aaron ? Ex. 16 : 1-3.
    6. What did the Lord say he would do to sat-
isfy their'hunger ? Verse 4.
    7. What test did he say this would be for them ?
—Lb.
    8. When were they told that they should re-
ceive food ? Verses 6-8, 12.
    9. What kind of flesh did they have at even ?
Verse 13.
  1o. In the morning when the dew was gone
what did they find? Verses 14, 15.
  it. Describe the manna. Num. 11 : 7.
  12. How did they prepare it, and how did it
taste ? Verse 8.
  13. How much were they to gather for each
person ? Ex. 16:16•.
  14. How was it if some gathered too much or
not enough? Verses 17, 18.
  15. What practical lesson does the apostle Paul
draw from this ? 2 Cor. 8 : 13-15.
  16. What took place if they tried to • keep the
manna till the next day ? Ex. 16 : 19, 20.
  17. On the sixth day what did they do ? Verse
22.
  18, What instruction had they received on this
point ? Verse 5.
               OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.            27

  19. What did Moses say to them on that day?
Verse 23.
   20. Did any manna-fall on the Sabbath ? Verse
26.
  21. How were they provided with food on that
day ? Verses 23, 24, 29.
  22. What did some of the people do on the sev-
enth day? Verse 27.
  23. What reproof did the Lord give them?
Verse 28.
  24. How long did the children of Israel eat the
manna? Verse 35.
  25. Show how they could not by any possibility
have made a mistake in regard to the Sabbath in
that time.
  26. In giving the manna, what purpose did God
effect besides supplying the children of Israel with
food ?
   27. What does the psalmist say this manna was?
Ps. 78 : 24, 25.
  28. Of what was it a type? John 6 : 48-51, 58.



           •
               LESSON X.
                    MARCH 9, 1889.
           WATER FROM THE ROCK.

   I. RELATE the instances already learned, in
which God miracurously interposed to deliver his
people.
   2. After all these deliverances, how should they
have felt?
28          OLD Y'ESTAMEND HISTORY.


    3. Into what straits were they brought in their
next encampment, after the giving of the manna?
Ex. 17 : I.
 . 4. What did they do ? Verse 2.
    5. With what did they again charge Moses?
Verse 3.
    6. What were tney about to do to him ? Verse 4.
    7. Against whom were they really murmuring?
Verse 2, last part.
    8. What doubt was indicated by their murmur-
ing ? Verse 7.
    9. What did they thereby virtually say about
the wonderful miracles that they had witnessed ?
   to. How did the Lord provide for them on this
occasion? Ex. 17 : 5, 6.
   II. What graphic deScription does the. psalmist
give of this? Ps. 78 : 15, 16.
   12. Of what was their drinking water from the
rock an emblem ? I Cor. to : 4.
   13. What kind of water does Christ give ? John
4: 10.
   14. What will it do for the one who drinks it?
Verse 14.
   15. While the Jews were at Rephidim, what
other trouble did they have? Ex. 17 : 8.
   16. Relate what followed. Verses 9-13.
   17. What was shown by this circumstance ? Ans.
—That they were delivered, 'not by their own
strength, but by the direct interposition of God.
   18. What does the prophet Isaiah say of God's
tender care for them ? Isa. 63 : 9.
              OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.               29

   19. What beautiful illustration is given to show
 how the Lord carried them ? Deut. 32 : 11, 12.
   20. Of what may the people of God always be
 assured? Deut. 33 : 25-27.


                   SSON XI.
                       16, 1886.
                     MARCH

            THE GIVING OF THE LAW.

      1. How long was it after •the children of Israel
  left Egypt until they came to Sinai ? Ex. 19 : I, 2.
      2. What did the Lord say he would do the
'third day afterward? Verses io, 11.
      3. What precaution was taken to keep the peo-
  ple from touching the mount ? Verse 12.
      4. What severe penalty was to follow any viola-
  tion of this order ? Verses 12, 13, 21.
      5. With what words did Moses describe this
  setting off of the mount? Verse 23.
      6. What other order indicated the solemnity of
  what was about to be done ? Verses io, 14, 22.
      7. What terrible things did the people hear on
  the third day? Verse 16.
      8. What caused this ? Verses 18, zo.
      9. For what purpose did the Lord come down
  upon Sinai in his terrible glory ? Neh. 6 : 13, 14.
     lip. Who accompanied him? Deut. 33 :2; Ps.
  6g:17.
      1. Of what was this giving of the law a mani-
  festation? Deut. 33 : 2, 3.
     12. 'Where do we find the law which the Lord
  spoke from Sinai ? Ex. 20 : 3-17.
30          OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


  13. What is the law called, which the Lord
spoke ? Deut. 4 : 12, 13.
  14. Did he speak anything beside the ten com-
mandments ? Deut. 5 : 22.
  15. As soon as he had spoken them, what did
the people say? Ex. 20 : 18, 19; Heb. 12 : 19.
  16. What does Paul say of the awfUlness of that
occasion ? Heb. 12 : 20, 2I.
  17. Upon what did God write the ten command-
ments ? Deut. 4 : 13; 5 : 22.
  18. When will the trump of God be heard again?
  Thess. 4 : 16; I Cor. 15 : 51, 52.
  19. When the voice of the Lord was heard at
Sinai, what took place? Ex. 19 : 18, 19; Ps. 68 : 8.
  20. What will take place when it is heard at the
last day? Heb. 12 : 26; Joel 3 : 16.



          Ea 33 8 S 0 14if X I I
                    MARCH 23, 1889.

          RETURNING TO BONDAGE.

    I. AFTER the covenant between God and Israel
had been ratified, what did the Lord say to Moses?
Ex. 24 :
  • 2. What covered the mount, and what was its
appearance ? Verses 15-17.
    3. How long was Moses in the mount? Verse
 8.
    4. Did he eat or drink during that time ? Deut.
9 9.
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY'.               31

    5. When the Lord had finished talking with
Moses, what did he give him ? Ex. 31 : 18.
    6. What was on these tables of stone? Deut.
9 : 1o.                               .
    7. Whose workmanship were the tables, and
how were they filled ? Ex. 32 : 15, 16.
    8. What did the people say and do when' they
saw how long Moses was gone ? Verses 1-3.
    9. What did Aaron do with the gold? Verse
4, first part.
   Jo. What did they call this golden calf ? Verse 4,
last part.
   11. What does the psalmist say of this ? Ps.
Io6 : 19, 20.
   12. Before they could do this, what did they for-
get? Verses 21, 22.
   13. How did they worship this image ? Ex.
32 : 6.
   14. What must we conclude as to the nature of
this " play " ? See notes.
   15. How did the people happen to make a calf
to worship, instead of the image of a man ? See
notes.
   16. What was the Egyptian calf-worship ? See
notes.
   17. How extensive was sun-worship anciently?
and what was the nature of it? See notes.
  18. What did God think to do to the Israelites
for their abominable idolatry? Ex. 32- : 9, io;'
Deut. 9 : 20.
  19. With what words did Moses plead for them ?
Ex. 32 : 11-13, 31, 32.
32           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


  20. Did the Lord grant his request ? Verses 14,
33, 34.
  21. What immediate punishment did the people
receive? Verses 19, 20, 26-28, 35.
                      NOTES.
   IN an article entitled, " Sun Images and the
Sun of Righteousness," in the Old Testament
Student, January, 1886, Dr. Talbot W. Cham-
bers calls sun worship "the oldest, the most
widespread, and the most enduring of all the forms
of idolatry know to man." And again: "The
universality of this form of idolatry is something
remarkable. It seems to have prevailed every-
where." " In Egypt the sun was the kernel of
the State religion. In various forms he stood at
the head of each hierarchy. At Memphis he was
worshiped as Phtah, at Heliopolis as Turn, at
Thebes as Amun Ra. Personified by Osiris he be-
came the foundation of the Egyptian metempsy-
chosis."
   In " Religions of the Ancient World," p. 21,
Prof. George Rawlinson says: " No part of the
Egyptian religion was so much developed and
so multiplex as their sun-worship. Besides Ra
and Osiris, there were at least six other deities who
had a distinctly solar character."
   Concerning Osiris, the "Encyclopedia Britannica"
(art. Egypt) says:—
   " Abydos was the great seat of the worship of
Osiris, which spread all over Egypt, establishing
itself in a remarkable manner at Memphis. All
the mysteries of the Egyptians, and their whole
doctrine of the future state, attach themselves to
this worship. Osiris was identified with the sun.
. . . Sun-worship was the primitive form of the
Egyptian religion, perhaps even pre-Egpytian."
   But while Osiris was the Egyptain sun-god, or
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.                33

the chief representation of the. sun, he was chiefly
represented by a sacred bull, called Apis. On
this the      Encyclopedia Britannica " (art. Apis)
says:—
   " According to the Greek writers Apis was the
image of Osiris, and worshiped because Osiris
was supposed to have passed into a bull, and to have
been soon after manifested by a succession of these
animals. The hieroglyphic inscriptions identify
the Apis with Osiris, adorned with horns or the
head of a bull, and unite the two names as Hapi-
Osor, or Apis Osiris. According to this view the
Apis was the incarnation of Osiris manifested in the
shape of a bull."
   From these quotations it is easy to see why the
Israelites made a golden calf, instead of an image
of something else. They made the god and began
the form of worship with which they had been
most familiar in Egypt. And when they did this,
they were simply engaging in sun-worship, the
form of idolatry which in all ages has been the most
universal rival of the worship of Jehovah.
   As to the nature of sun-worship, it will perhaps
be sufficient to quote what the "Encyclopedia
 Britannica" says of Baal:—
   " The Baal of the Syrians, Phcenicians, and
 heathen Hebrews is a much less elevated conception
 than the Babylonian Bel. He is properly the sun-
 god Baal-Shamem, Baal (lord) of the heavens, the
 highest of the heavenly bodies, but still a mere
 power of nature, born like the other luminaries
 from the primitive chaos. As the sun-god he is
 conceived as the male principle of life and re-
 production in nature, and thus in some forms of
 his worship is the patron of the grossest sensuality,
 and even of systematic prostitution. An example
 of this is found in the worship of Baal-Peor (Num-
 bers 25), and in general in the Canaanitish high
 places, where Baal, the male principle, was wor-
            3
34          OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


shiped in association with the unchaste goddess
Ashera, the female principle of nature. ".
   This is a mild statement of the case; and so when
we read of the Israelites that "the people sat down
to eat and to drink, and rose up to play" (Ex. 32:6),
and learn that the word rendered "play" is the
same as that rendered " mock " in Gen. 39:14, 17,
we get a better idea of the heinousness of the sin
of the Israelites.

   WHEN it is remembered that the Egyptian calf-
worship was sun-worship, and that Sunday was
" the wild solar holiday of all pagan times"
(North British Review, vol. 18, p. 409), and has
its name " because the day was anciently dedicated
to the sun, or to its worship " (Webster), the
Heaven-daring nature of the sin of the Israelites,
just after they had heard God's holy law, and espe-
cially the first, second, fourth, and seventh com-
mandments, is most strikingly set before us. A
more perfect insult to the God who had delivered
them from Egyptian bondage, that they might serve
him, can hardly be imagined.


  ONE more point should be noted, to show how
completely, in intent, the Israelites went back
to Egyptian bondage, by their worship of the
golden calf. A preceding quotation has shown
that Ra and Osiris were intimately associated as
leading representatives of the sun of Ra. Pro-
fessor Rawlinson, in " Religions of the Ancient
World," p. 20, says:—
  " Ra was the Egyptian sun-god, and was espe-
cially worshiped at Heliopolis [city of the sun].
Obelisks, according to some, represented his rays,
and were always, or usually, erected in his honor.
Heliopolis was certainly one of the places which
            OLD TESTAMENT                         85

were thus adorned, for one of the few which still
stand erect in Egypt is on the site of that city.
The kings for the most part considered Ra their
special patron and protector; nay, they went so far
as to identify themselves with him, to use his titles
as their own, and to adopt his name as the ordinary
prefix to their own names and titles. This is be-
lieved by many to have been the origin of the word
Pharaoh, which was, it is thought, the Hebrew
rendering of Ph' Ra--` the sun.' "—Ib., 35. 20.
   Thus the Israelites not only deliberately sunx
themselves in the bondage of sin, but also more
fully showed their willingness to return to bondage
under Pharaoh, than when they sighed for the leeks
and the onions of Egypt. Their deliverance from
physical bondage was in order that they might be
delivered from spiritual bondage, and was a repre-
sentation of it; and when they had plunged into
sin, they placed themselves in a worse bondage
than any physical oppression could ever have been.
Being overcome by the idolatry of Egypt, they
virtually returned to the bondage of Egypt, "for
of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage." 2 Peter 2: 19.


             ESSIO IS1 VIII.
                    MARCH 30, 1889.

  SUGGESTIONS FOR QUARTERLY REVIEW.

   r. How many plagues came upon Egypt be-
cause of Pharaoh's refusal to let the Israelites go?
   2. How many of these were imitated by the
magicians ?
   3. What effect did the work of the magicians
have upon Pharaoh ?
36          OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.

     4. What similar thing will take place in the
last days ?
     5. What power is behind all opposition to the
truth? John 8:44.
     6. What was the character and disposition of
Pharaoh ?
     7. What effect did the plagues have upon him?
     8. How was he confirmed in his obstinacy ?
     9. State the instances in which God showed his
special care for his people.
    io. When, how, and why was the passover in-
stituted ?
    ii. Of what was the deliverance from Egypt a
type? Ans.—Of the deliverance of God's people
from the bondage of sin and this wicked world, to
the heavenly Canaan.
   12. Show that Christ was the real leader of the
Israelites.
   13. Relate the circumstances of the giving of
the law.
   14. Why was the law given amid such terrible
majesty ?
   15. What is the only other event that can com-
pare with the giving of the ten commandments ?
   16. What great wickedness did the Israelites do
while Moses was in the mount with God ?
   17. What was the nature of their idolatry?
   i8. What form of idolatry has from the earliest
ages drawn men from the worship of God ?
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.               37


        :LESSON XIV.
                     APRIL 6, x889.
            FREE-WILL OFFERINGS.

     I. WHILE Moses was in the mount, what did
God tell him to say to the children of Israel? Ex.
25: 1, 2.
    2. Of what was their offering to consist ?
Verses 3-7.
    3. What were these offerings for? Verse 8.
    4. Who only were to bring an offering? Verse
2; Ex. 35:5, 21.
    5. What sort of things did they bring ? Ex.
35: 22-24.
    6. How did they come to have so many valua-
ble things ? Ex. 12: 35, 36.
    7. What did the women do ? . Ex. 35: 25, 26.
    8. What kind of service was all this ? Verse 29.
    9. How are we exhorted to give ? 2 Cor. 9: 7.
  1o. What kind of a giver does God love ?—Ib.
    1. Cite another instance where the people of-
fered willingly to the cause of God ? I Chron.
29: 6-8.
   12. How was it that the people were enabled to
give so willingly? Verse 9.
   13. Is there danger of coming to poverty through
generous giving to the cause of God ? Prov.
II : 24, 25.
   14. What is God able to do ? 2 Cor. 9: 8, II.
   85. How is this? Ps. 24: I; 50: 10-12; Hag-
gai 2: 8.
38           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY


   16. Then when people make offerings to God,
whose property do they give ? r Chron. 29: 14-16.
   17. What was the result when the people gave
with a willing heart? Ex. 36: 4, 5.
   18. What proclamation had to be made ? Verses
6, 7.
   19. How many have known of such an instance
in the history of the cause ?
   20. Is there in this record any lesson for us ?
                        NOTE.
   IN his second epistle to the Corinthians, the
apostle Paul makes the grace of Christ the
grand spring.of all Christian giving. Giving that
is prompted by anything else is not Christian giv-
ing. As an incentive for them to give liberally, the
apostle said: " For ye know the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your
sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty
might be rich." . 2 Cor. 8: 9. The plan of salva-
tion begins and ends in a gift. "God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that who-
soever believeth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life." John 3: r6. Christ " gave him-
self for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous
of good works." Titus 2: 14. And when the
work of redemption shall have been completed, the
saints will share a glorious immortality as the free
gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
This consideration should incite to prompt and
cheerful giving. Indeed, it will lead to such giving,
on the part of every soul who feels the worth of
the Saviour's love. Surely it is a slight thing to
give the temporal riches which come from God in
the first place, and belong to him, when he so
freely gives to us eternal, riches: " The riches of
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.                 39

his grace " is an expression often used by the apos-
tle Paul. But the grace of God is a gift, and consists
wholly in giving; we are exhorted to be "good
stewards of the manifold grace of God." i Peter
4: to. The spirit of willingness to give is a grace,
and a manifestation of the grace of God. See 2
Cor. 8: 4-7. A converted church must be a liberal
church. A revival that does not increase the con-
tributions of a church, is not the right kind of a
revival; for those who, like the brethren in Mace-
donia, first give themselves to the Lord, will, like
them, abound in liberality, even in deep poverty.
See 2 Cor. 8 :1-5. This is further proved by the
experience of the people in the time of Hezekiah.
See 2 Chron. 3o and 31, comparing especially
chapter 3o : 18-2o and 3I : 4-I I.


          LESSON XV.
                     APRIL. 13, 1889.
                THE TABERNACLE.

    I. WHAT was the object of the sanctuary which
the Lord told the children of Israel to build ? Ex.
25:8.
    2. Was this an entirely new though' l to them?
Ex. 15: I, 2.
    3. Of what was the frame-work of the tabernacle
made ? Ex. 26:15.
    4. How many boards were there on each side?
Verses i8 20.
    5W-hat were the dimensions of each board ?
Verse i6.
     6. Then what was the length and-the height of
 the tabernacle ?
40          OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


    7. How were these boards kept in an upright
position? Verses 17, 19, 26-28.
    8. Describe the west end of the tabernacle.
Verses 22-25.
    9. With what was all the wood-work covered?
Verse 29.        •
   to. How was the east end inclosed? Verses
36, 37.
  11. What formed the ceiling of the tabernacle ?
Verse I; see also verses 2-6.
  12. What covering was above this? Verse 7;
see also verses 8-13.
  13. What further protection did the tabernacle
have above? Verse 14.
  14. How many apartments were there in the
tabernacle? what were they called? and how were
they separated? Verses 31-33.
  15. How was Moses guided in building this tab-
ernacle? Ex. 25 : 8, 9.
  16. Was this tabernacle the real dwelling-place
of God? I Kings 8: 27; Acts 7:48, 49; Isa. 66:
I, 2.
  17. Whitfr were these "holy places" which.
Moses maele ? Heb. 9:23, 24.
   18. Then where are the true holy places ?
   19. Is there a real sanctuary, a special dwelling-
place, for God in Heaven? Heb. 8: 1, 2; Ps. II: 4;,
  Kings 8:30.
   zo. In the type, what were pictured         1 the
curtains within ? Ex. 26: 1, 31.
   21. What were these to represent in the reality?
Rev. 5:II
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.              41

  22. For what purpose are these angels round
about the throne of God in the heavenly sanctuary?
Ps. 103: 19, 20; Heb. I : 14; Dan. 7 : 9, 10.


         LESSON X. -rsTI.
                    APRIL 20, 1889.

   THE ARK-ITS USE AND SIGNIFICANCE.

    I. NAME the articles of furniture that were in
the tabernacle? Ex. 25 : to, 23, 31; 3o : I.
    2. According to what were they fashioned?
Ex. 25 : 40.
    3. Of what were they representations ? Heb.
9 : 21-23.
    4. Have any of these articles been seen in the
true tabernacle in Heaven? Rev. II.: 19; :12;
8 :3.
    5. Describe the ark. Ex. 25 : 10-12.
    6. Tell what the covering of the ark was called,
and describe it. Verses 17, 21, first part.
    7. What was upon the mercy-seat, or cover of
the ark? Verses 18-2o.
    8. In what part of this tabernacle was God's
presence specially manifested? Verse 22; Num.
7:89; 8:I.
    9. What do we read of the real throne of God?
 Ps. it :4; 99 : i; see also Eze. 1.
   1o. Since the tabernacle was a figure of the
 true s'anctuary in Heaven, what must have been
signified by the ark with its covering, from which
 God spoke? Ans.—The throne of God in Heaven.
42          OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


    t. What was placed in the ark in the earthly
sanctuary? Ex. 25 : i6, 21; Deut. to :4, 5.
  12. Remembering that everything about the
earthly sanctuary was a representation of things in
the heavens, what must we conclude from the fact
that the tables containing the ten commandments
were placed in the ark, from above which God
spoke? Ans.—That the law of God—the ten com-
mandments—is underneath the throne of God in
Heaven.
  13. What statements have we to this effect?
Ps. 89:14; 97 : 2.
  14. What are the commandments of God de-
clared to be ? Ps. 119 : 172.
  15. Whose righteousness are they ? Isa. 51 :
6, 7.
  16. Since the law of God is the foundation of
his throne, how enduring must it be? Ps. 36 : 5,
6; 111: 7, 8; 119 : 16o.
  17. To what would the abolition of the law of
God be equivalent? Ans.—To the overthrow of
the Government of God.
  18. Then is it conceivable that the law can be
abolished or changed?
                      NOTE.
  IT is absolutely inconceivable that the law of God
should be abolished, or changed in the slightest
particular. It is the righteousness of God, and that
cannot be different from what it is. It is his will,
and God changes not. It is the foundation of his
throne, his Government, and that cannot change,
because he is "from everlasting to everlasting."
There is just one thing that the Bible declares that
           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.                 43

God cannot do: " He cannot deny himself." He
cannot be other than he is. And so it is absolutely
impossible for the omnipotent God himself to change
or abrogate his law, for in so doing he would deny
himself; he would change his character, his will,
and his Government, and would cease to be God.
But this is inconceivable; and so we repeat that it
is absolutely inconceivable that the law of God
should be abolished or changed.


        LESSON
                     APRIL 27, 1889.

              OFFERINGS FOR SIN.

    I. WHAT has God represented himself as most
willing to do ? Isa. 55 :7.
    2. In what does he delight? Micah 7 :18.
    3. How great is his mercy? Ps. 103 :II.
    4. What will he do for our iniquities, and where
will he put them ? Micah 7 :19.
    5. How far does he remove our transgressions
from us, if we but repent ? Ps. 103 :12.
    6. What assurance have we of all this? Rom.
8:31, 32.
    7. What is it that cleanses from sin ? John 1 :
29; I John 1 : 7.
    8. Yet what were the Israelites required to do
when they committed sin? Num. 15 : 27, 28.
    9. Tell the particulars of this sin-offering. Lev.
4 : 29-31.
   Io. In case the entire offering was burnt, what
was done with the blood? Lev. 4:5-7, 88, 12.
44           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


    II. What is said of the blood ? Lev. 17 : 11,
 last part.
    12. When only the fat of the sin-offering was
 burnt, what was done with the flesh? Lev. 6 : 26,
 3o.
   13. In this case, what was the flesh considered
 as bearing into the sanctuary? Lev. to : 16, 17.
   14. Was there any power in these offerings to
 cleanse from sin? Heb 10 : I, 4.
   15. Yet were not the people actually and fully
 pardoned when they made these offerings? Num.
 15 : 28; see also Lev. 4, noting especially verses
 20, 26, 31, 35.
   16. Then what must have been the significance
of those offerings? Ans.—They represented the
death of Christ, "who his own self bare our sins in
his body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins,
should live unto righteousness" (I Peter 2 :24), by
whose stripes we are healed. God's promise makes
future things as real as though they had been already
performed, and so the blood of Christ was as powerful
to cleanse from sin in the days of Moses as it is now.
The sin-offerings that the people brought, simply
showed their faith that the Lord had laid upon Jesus
the iniquity of us all, and that there is cleansing in
his blood. It was by faith that all sacrifices that
were of any value were' made. Heb. it : 4. It was
faith that made the people whole in those days, as
well as in the days of Christ, or at the present time;
and without faith it was as impossible to please
God then as it is now.
   17. If there was not true repentance, would any
sacrifice avail ? Ps. 66:18.
             OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.             45

  18. What does the Lord require of us? Hosea
6:6; Micah 6:6-8.
  19. What are the real sacrifices of God? Ps.
51:16, 17.
                    NOTE.
   WHEN the Lord says, " For I desired mercy,
and not sacrifice," and David says, "Thou de-
sirest not sacrifice, else would I give it; thou de-
lightest not in burnt-offering," we must under-
stand it as meaning that God never had any de-
light in sacrifices andturnt-offering unaccompanied
by a contrite spirit; for immediately after David
said what we have just quoted from him, he added:
"Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of
righteousness, with burnt-offering and whole burnt-
offering." The meaning is that God is not pleased
with mere form and soulless ceremony. He does
not desire a person to do penance, and his favor
cannot be bought by any amount of treasure, or
affliction of one's body. See Micah 6: 6-8. But
he is pleased with a broken and contrite heart; and
such a heart will say from the fullness of its sense
of the divine mercy, "What shall I render unto the
Lord for all his benefits toward me ? I will take
the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in
the presence of all his people." Ps. 116:12-14.


       LESSON
                     MAY 4, 1889.

UNSANCTIFIED SERVICE, AND THE RESULT.

   I. WHAT article of furniture was just before
the vail of the most holy place in the sanctuary?
Ex. 4o : 26, 27.
46          OLD TESTAMENT D'IsTORY.


   •2. How often was incense to be offered on it?
Ex. 3o : 7, 8.
    3. What else was done at the same time? Ex.
29 : 38, 39, 42.
    4. What reference does David make to this
custom? Ps. 141 : I, 2.
    5. While the sacrifice and incense were being
offered, what did the people do? Luke I :8-1o.
    6. What was signified by the incense? Rev.
5 :8, margin.
    7. What commandment did the Lord make
concerning the offering of incense upon the altar?
Ex. 3o : 9.
    8. Who violated this commandment? Lev.
10 : I.
    9. How were they punished? Verse 2.
   io. What special instruction did the Lord then
give Aaron ? Verses 8, 9.
    1. From this what must we conclude was the
cause of the error of Nadab and Abihu? Ans. —
That they had been drinking wine, and did not
fully realize what they were about.
  12. Why was it that their perceptions should
not be clouded by strong drink? Verse io.
   13. Can an intemperate man properly serve the
Lord? 2 Pet. I :5, 6; I Cor. 9: 25.
   14. What other instance can you name where
God showed, in a special manner, the difference
between holy and common things? 2 Sam. 6 :6, 7.
   15. If God could make one portion of fire and
one article of furniture holy, could he not also
make one day holy above all others?
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.              47

   i6. What day has God made holy? Ex. '2o :
8-11.
   17. Did the fact that Nadab and Abihu used the
strange fire in the service of the Lord, make that
fire holy?
   i8. Then can men by devoting a certain day to
religious uses make it holy if God has not hallowed
it? Lam. 3:37.
   19. What curse has God pronounced upon those
who put no difference between common and holy
things? Isa. 5:2o-24.


        LESSON XIX..
                MAY xx, 1889.
      UNBELIEF AND ITS PUNISHMENT.

    I. How far did the Israelites travel after they
left Sinai before they encamped again? Num.
to: 33.
    2. How were they guided in selecting a place
to camp ?-16.
    3. What did Moses say when the ark set for-
ward? Verse 35.
    4. What did he say when it rested? Verse 36.
    5. When the people again complained, what
followed ? Num. i I:I.
    6. What does the psalmist say was the reason
they were thus punished ? Ps. 78: 20-22.
    7. What made this murmuring inexcusable?
Verses 23, 24.
    8. Is it any less excusable if God's people com-
plain now? Lam. 3:22, 23.
48          OLD TESTAMENT • HISTORY.


    9. In the instance under consideration, how
were the people saved? Num. i i : 2.
   Io. What was proved by that? James 5:16.
    1. Did this lesson prove sufficient to keep the
people from murmuring? Num. II :4-6.
   I2. When Moses heard their murmurings, how
did he feel? Verses II, 14.
   13. What provision did the Lord make to lighten
his burden? Verses i6, 17.
   14. What did he say the people should have?
Verse 18.
   15. How abundantly did he say they should be
supplied? Verses 19, 20.
   16. What did Moses say of this great promise?
Verses 21, 22.
   17. What did the Lord reply to his implied
doubt? Verse 23.
   i8. How was the promise fulfilled? Verse 31;
Ps. 78: 27-29.
   19. How did the people manifest their greed,
and their distrust in God ? Num. II :32; Ps. 78:
30, 31.
   20. What was the result? Num. 11:33.
   21. Did this cause the rest of the people to be-
lieve God? Ps. 78:32.
                       NOTE.
  THE rendering in our common version, which
makes the quail to have been piled up "two cubits
high upon the face of the earth," is uncalled for
and unwarranted. The Revised Version gives the
proper sense and rendering, by putting it, "about
two cubits above the face of the earth." The
Vulgate has it, "And they flew in the air, about
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.              49

two cubits above the earth." . This is a very free
translation, nevertheless it exactly expresses the
sense of the original. The quails flew about breast
high, and so were easily killed. Many readers of
this will recall flights of pigeons in such numbers
as to darken the sun, and when they flew so low
as to be easily knocked down with clubs. In the
case under consideration, the quails were brought
miraculously, and were doubtless in miraculous
numbers; but the Bible, rightly translated, gives
no countenance to the absurdity of either living or
dead birds being piled up three feet high for a
space two days' journey in diameter.



         LESSON X.X.
                    MAY 18, 1889.
                 MIRIAM'S SIN.

    I. WHAT name was given to the place where the
people lusted for flesh? Num. i i : 34. -
    2. Where did they go from that place? Verse
35.
    3. What fault did Miriam and Aaron find with
Moses? Num 12: t.
    4. What showed that this complaint was due
solely to envy ? Verse 2.
    5. What testimony is here thrown in as to the
character of Moses? Verse 3.
    6. What promise has the Lord made concern-
ing such people ? Ps. 25: 9.
    7. Why will the Lord guide the meek rather
than any others? See note.
    8. Although the meek may be despised, of what
are they sure at last ? Ps. 37: It; Matt. 5: 5.
50           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


     9. Did the Lord overlook the envy of Miriam
and Aaron? Num. 12:4, 5.
    to. How did the Lord say he would reveal him-
self to a prophet? Verse 6.
     t. What showed that Moses was greater than
an ordinary prophet? Verses 7, 8.
   12. What direct statement have we concerning
the high standing of Moses? Deut. 34: 10-12.         -
   13. How did the Lord talk to Moses ? Num.
12:8; Deut. 34:1o.
   14. What punishment was inflicted upon Miriam ?
Num. 12:9, to.
   15. What prayer and confession did Aaron make ?
Verses 11, 12.
   16. Did Moses cherish any resentment in the
case ? Verse 13.
   17. How did the Lord show that Miriam's sin
was not a light one ? Verses 14, 15.
   18. If this . envying of Moses had not been
checked, what would have been the result ? James
3: 16.
   19. What lesson is this designed to teach us
Ans.—That those whom God places iii high position,
and honors with his special presence, are not to be
lightly spoken against. Not to be afraid to speak
evil of dignities is a characteristic of the grossly
wicked.
   20. What instruction did Paul give to Timothy,
who was himself placed over many churches ?
Tim. 5: 19.
                        NOTE.
  THE reason why the Lord will guide the meek
             OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.                 51

rather than any others, is because they are the
only ones that he can guide. The proud trust
to their own judgment, and will not follow the
leadings of God's Spirit. And since " it is not in
man that walketh to direct his steps," it follows that
" pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty
spirit before a fall." But those who " have no con-
fidence in the flesh " (Phil. 3: 3), are in a condition
to accept the wisdom that comes from above. God
desires to guide all men in judgment, and lead
them in the right way; but since he will not force
any to go contrary to their wishes, the meek, who
distrust themselves, are the only ones whom he
can guide. How much better for ,a man not to lean
to his own understanding, when he can have the
benefit of God's wisdom. Happy is the man who
can say from the heart,
          "I'd rather walk in the dark with God,
             Than walk alone in the light."



         :LESSON XX.I..
                       MAY 25, 1889.

        THE BLINDNESS OF UNBELIEF,

    I. WHEN Moses, according to the command of
the Lord, selected twelve men to spy out the
land of Canaan, what directions did he give them ?
Num. 13: 17-20.
    2. What evidence did they find of the fruitful-
ness of the land ? Verse 23.
    3. How long were they on their mission ? Verse
25.
    4. When they returned, what did they say of
the fruitfulness of the land ? Verse 27.
52          OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


     5. What did Moses afterward say of the land?
Deut. 8: 7-10.
     6. What did the spies say of the people ? Nuni.
13: 28, 29.
     7. Notwithstanding the promise of the Lord,
that he would bring them into the land, what did
the spies say? Verses 31-33.
     8. How did this report affect the people ? Num.
14: I.
  - 9. What foolish and wicked murmuring did they
indulge in ? Verses 2, 3.
    to. What did they propose to do ? Verse 4.
     1. What report did Caleb and Joshua bring ?
Verses 6-8.
    12. How did they seek to encourage the people ?
Num. 14: 9; 13:30.
    13. How did the people regard them for their
truthful report ? Num. 14: to.
    14. What proposition did the Lord make to
Moses, because of the stubborn unbelief of the peo-
ple ? Verses II, 12.
    15. How did Moses show his disinterested love
for the people and for the honor of God ? Verses
13-16.
    16. What request did he make? Verses 17-19.
    17. What answer did the Lord make? Verses
 20, 2I.
    18. What did the Lord say should become of
 those who had so often showed their unbelief and
 rebellion? Num. 14: 22, 23; 32: ICI, I I.
    19. Who only did he say should reach the prom-
 ised land ? Num. 32: 12.
           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.               53


  20. How long did he say the people should wan-
der in the wilderness ? Num. 14: 31-34.
  21. What became of the ten spies who brought an
evil report?. Verses 36, 37.
   22. When the people heard the Lord's sentence
against them, how did they feel? Verse 39.
   23. What did they then propose to do? Verse
40.
   24. What counsel did Moses give them ? Verses
 41-43.
   25. How much better was their courage now
than their cowardice before?
   26. What was the result of their presumption?
Verses 44, 45.
   27. What exhortation, based upon this lesson, is
given to us ? Heb. 4: 1, 2, II.


        LESSON
                    JUNE   I,   I889.
         THE REBELLION OF KORAH.

    I. WHAT instance have we already had of envy
because of the exalted position of Moses ?
    2. How did God regard that manifestation ?
    3. How was rebellion again fomented ? Num.
16: 1-3.
    4. Against whom were they really rebelling?
Verses 9—IT.
    5. When Moses sent for the conspirators, what
did they reply ? Verses 12-14.
    6. What false accusation did they bring against
Moses ?—Ib.
54           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


      7. How did Moses repel their charge ? Verse
15.
    8. What did the Lord tell the people to do ?
Verses 23, 24.
    9. Why was this order given ? Verse 26.
  1o. What did Moses say the Lord would do to
test the truth of the charges that had been brought
against him? Verses 28-30.
    1. What was done to Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram ? Verses 31-33.
  12. What was done to their fellow-conspirators?
Verse 35.
  13. What was done to keep this rebellion and its
result in mind, and as a warning to others ? Verses
37-40.
  14. Notwithstanding the fate of the rebellious
princes, what wicked charge did the people still
bring against Moses and Aaron ? Verse 41.
  15. What did the Lord say to this? Verses
44, 45.
  16. How quickly was the judgment of God
visited upon them ? Verses 46, 47.
   17. How many perished in this plague? Verse
49.
  18. How can you account for such daring re-
bellion as was manifested by the people?
                        NOTE.
  SUCH presumptuous rebellion as was manifested
by the people on this occasion, can be accounted
for only by saying that it was caused by the blind-
ness of unbelief. Their hearts had been hardened
by the deceitfulness of sin, until they were ready
to charge God to his face with injustice. Such
           OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.              55

Heaven-daring rebellion seems almost incredible,
yet it is often equaled in our day. The Israelites
had the same human nature that men have now-
adays, and were not sinners above all that have
ever lived.


      3 13 8 S IST XXIII.
                    JUNE 8, 1889.
              THE SIN OF MOSES.

    I. WHEN the Israelites came to Kadesh, in the
wilderness of Zin, what took place ? Num. 20: I.
    2. From what did the people suffer? Verse 2.
    3. What did they do and say? Verse 3.
    4. What did they charge Moses with doing?
Verse 4.
    5. What did they say of the place where they
then were ? Verse 5.
    6. Whom did they blame for bringing them
out of Egypt? Verses 3-5.
    7. Who had really brought them from Egypt ?
Ex. 20: 1, 2.
    8. Then to what was their murmuring equiva-
lent ? Ans.—To a denial that God had anything to
do with their wonderful deliverance.
    g. What does the psalmist say of them ? Ps.
                              _
106:21, 22. -
   To. While the sin of the Israelites was exceed-
ingly great, is it an uncommon one ?
     8. What did Moses and Aaron do in this ex-
tremity? Num. 20: 6.
   82. What directions did the Lord give them ?
Verses 7, 8.
66            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


   13. When the people were gathered before the
rock, what did Moses say? Verse 1o.
   14. What does the psalmist say of this occur-
rence ? Ps. 106:32, 33.
   15. How did it go ill with Moses ? Num. 20: 12.
   16. In what particular did Moses and Aaron
trespass against the Lord? Deut. 32:51.
   17. When Moses allowed the Israelites by their
rebellious words to provoke his spirit, what posi-
tion toward God did he also assume ? Num. 20:
24; 27: 14.
  18. Do we have any intimation that the Lord in
any degree excused his sin because he labored
under great provocation ?
  19. In this giving way to anger, of what grace
did Moses show a lack? i Cor. 13: 4, 5.
  20. What evidence have we that, although Moses
was prohibited from entering the promised land, he
repented of his sin and was fully forgiven ? Deut.
34: 5, 6; Jude 9; Matt. 17: 1-3.
  21. Then what must even the best of men say to
the Lord ? Ps. 130 : 3, 4.
                      NOTES.

   WE are often prone to excuse some sin in our-
selves, on the ground that it is the only time
we ever committed it; or that we but seldom fall
into it, and only under the greatest provocation.
Many seem to think that if a person has great
provocation he can commit a sin with impunity.
But that reasoning would have made it right for the
Saviour to yield to Satan's temptations in the wil-
derness; for no man ever suffered so fierce tempta-
tion. The truth is, there is no excuse for sin, and
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.               57

anger is not admissible under any circumstances.
When the translators of our common version of the
Bible, wrote that charity " is not easily provoked,"
they were evidently moved by some consideration
for the weakness of the flesh. They seem to have
the idea that a man might have charity and still be
provoked to anger, providing he was not very
easily provoked. But they did great injustice to
the truth, for the words as Paul wrote them are
simply, " is not provoked." True charity does
not get provoked under any circumstances.

   THE sin of Moses was a great one, even greater
than that of the people; for he had all the light
that they had, and more. It is true that the people
were the cause of his fall, yet that did not in the
least relieve him from responsibility. The real
cause, after all, was in his own heart, otherwise
nothing that the people could have done would
have moved him. The Lord cannot tolerate sin,
no matter in whom it appears, yet he is " the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering,
and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping
 mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and trans-
gression and sin." Ex. 34: 6, 7. That Moses re-
 pented, and was abundantly pardoned, is shown
 by the fact that after his death he was raised
 and taken to Heaven, and was commissioned to
 come on a message of love to Christ. From
 this we are warranted in concluding that if it
 had not been for this one sin he would not only
 have been permitted to enter the land of Canaan,
 but would, like Elijah, have been translated without
 seeing death.
53         OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


       LESSON XXIV-
                    JUNE   15,'1889.
             SIN AND ITS REMEDY,

     I. WHAT troubled the people of Israel as they
journeyed from Mount Hor by way of the Red Sea ?
Num. 21 : 4.
    2. What did they at once do? Verse 5.
    3. In the face of what especial help from God
did they thus wickedly murmur? Verses 1-3.
    4. What punishment did the Lord send upon
them for their murmurings ? Verse 6.
    5. When the people confessed their sin, what
did the Lord tell Moses to do ? Verses 7, 8.
    6. What was the result? Verse 9.
    7. By what were those saved who looked upon
the serpent?
    8. Of what was the lifting up of the serpent a
figure? John 3 : 14, 15.
    9. When the people murmured, against whom
were they rebelling ? i Cor. fo : 9.
   to. Then when the people looked upon the
brazen serpent, what did their act signify? Ans.—
That they now trusted Christ, their great Leader,
and acknowledged that their punishment was due
to lack of faith in him.
    1. Until what time did the children of Israel
preserve the brazen serpent ? 2 Kings 18 : 1-4.
   82. How had they come to regard it? Verse 4.
   13. What did Hezekiah call it ?--lb., margin.
   14. In thus worshiping the brazen serpent, what
did the people do? Rom. I : 25.
            OLD TPSTAMENT HISTORY.                59

   15. When people lose faith, what will they inev-
itably do? Rom. 14 : 23, last part.
   i6. How alone can' men live righteous lives?
Hab. 2 : 4; t John 5 :4.
                        NOTE.
   THE performance of any ordinance by'which we
are directed to show our faith in God, becomes sin
whenever faith does not prompt it. Instead of
then being an act of worship to God, it becomes
an act of idolatry. Thus the Lord's Supper has
been perverted by the Roman Catholics into the
idolatrous mass, the participating in which is gen-
 erally thought to secure the pardon of sin. As the
Jews made an idol of the brazen serpent, which
was intended as an instrument of faith, so they often,
and especially in the time of Christ and later, re-
 garded their sacrifices much as the Catholics regard
 the mass.


        LESSON XXV.
                      JUNE 22,   1889.
      THE WAGES OF UNRIGHTEOUSNESS.

    i. How was Balak, king of the Moabites, af-
fected by the success of the Israelites ? Num.
22 :.I-4.
    2. To whom did he send messengers ? Verse 5.
    3. What did he want Balaam to do ? Verse 6.
    4. When the elders of Moab brought the re-
wards of divination to Balaam, what did he say ?
Verses 7, 8.
60          OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.


    5. What did the Lord tell Balaam ? Verse 12.
    6. Did Balaam plainly understand that the
Lord did not want him to go to curse Israel ?
Verse 13.
    7. When Balak received Balaam's reply, what
did he do ? Verses 15-17.
    8. What reply did Balaam give to the messen-
gers? Verse 18.
    9. Nevertheless, how did he show that he
greatly desired to go ? Verse 19.
  to. How much permission did God give him?
Verse 20.
  I t. Did Balaam go on this permission? Verse
21.
   12. Was God pleased with Balaam's course?
Verse 22.
   13. Relate what followed. Verses 23-3o.
   14. When Balaam's eyes were opened, what did
he see? Verse 31.
   15. What did the angel of the Lord say of Ba-
laam's course ? Verse 32.
   16. What did he say would have been done to
him if the ass had not turned aside? Verse 33.
   17. How much more could the Lord have said
and done to show that he did not want Balaam to
go to Balak ?
  18. Notwithstanding this, what did Balaam say ?
Verse 34.
  19. What did the angel of the Lord reply?
Verse 35.
   20. When people show a strong determination
to have their own way, regardless of the expressed
              OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.                      61

will of God, hoW does the Lord deal with them ?
Ps. 81 : 11, 12; Prov. i : 3o, 31.
   21. What will be the final consequence to such ?
Prov. r : 32.
   22. What was the fate of Balaam ? Num. 31 :
6-8.
   23. What was the secret of Balaam's intense de-
sire to comply with Balak's request ? 2 Peter 2 : 15.
   24. What is said of those who will be rich?
I Tim. 6 : 9.
   25. What of the love of money ? Verse to.
   26. What is said of th.Ose in the church who,
like Balaam, are greedy for gain? Jude 11-13.
   27. What are the real wages of unrighteousness?
Rom. 6 : 23, first part.
   28. And what is the gift of God        last part.
   29. What is indicated by this? Ans.—That
while those who die as a punishment for their sins,
get only what they lawfully deserve, eternal life
cannot be earned, but is something infinitely be-
yond the power of any human being to earn. God
does not pay us for what we do, for we cannot do
anything that is worth paying for; at the best we
are but unprofitable servants. But he gives us all
that we have, and all that we can ever receive, be-
cause of his own wondrous love and mercy, and
the merit of Jesus Christ in whom we live.


        LABSSON XX -YsTi.
                        JUNE 29, 1889.
  SUGGESTIONS FOR QUARTETLY REVIEW.
  [NOTE.—It is not expected that the teachers will use just
these questions in their review. They are only suggestive, and
62              OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.

do not cover nearly all the ground.. Some lessons are not even
referred to.- It would be an impossibility for any teacher to
cover in one lesson all the principal points that have been passed
over during the quarter, and therefore each teacher should care-
fully review all the preceding lessons, and select just those points
which impress him as being the most important, or containing
thoughts most necessary for that special time, and confine his
attention to them. Points that received insufficient attention in
the first instance, may now be dwelt upon at greater length.
   We would advise that the superintendent or division leader do
not go over the same ground that the most of the teachers do, but
take up some other portion of the review, as by so doing much
more ground can be covered.]

    I. BY what means was the sanctuary built ?
    2. Tell how it was repaired.
    3. What was the result when the people gave
willingly ?
    4. What enabled them to give so willingly?
    5. In order to have our gifts of money accepta-
ble to God, what must we first do ? 2 Cor. 8:5.
    6. What is the only kind of giving that God
loves or will accept ?
    7. What was the tabernacle for ?
    8. In what part was God's presence specially
manifested?
    9. What was represented by the ark, with the
cherubim of glory overshadowing it?
   to. What was signified by the fact that under-
neath the cherubim of glory was the law of God ?
  It. What is sin ?
  12. What is indicated by the fact that immediately
above the law which had been transgressed, was the
mercy-seat, and the cherubim between which the
glory of God appeared ? Ans.—That God sits
upon a throne of grace, and delights in mercy, and
that wherever there is sin there is the remedy.
            OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY.              63

" Mercy and truth have met together; righteous-
ness and peace have kissed each other." Where
sin abounds, grace does much more abound.
Whenever a sin is committed, the remedy is im-
mediately at hand.
   13. By what various judgments did God show
that it is not a light thing to speak against his
servants ?
   14. On what various instances did the Israelites
show their wicked unbelief of God ?
   15. What is the foundation of all goodness? 2
Peter 1: 5; Jude 20, 21.
   16. Then what must be the universal besetting
sin ?
   17. To what then must we take heed ? Heb. 3:
12, 13; 4: I, 2.,
   18. What evidence have we that God will not
make the slightest excuse for sin, even in his most
highly honored and best-beloved servant ?
   19. By what were/the people in those days saved,
when they sinned ?
               palbigi#SPBBPRI
                             AND THE




               0. Lord's Day.
     The 50§GG and ,p,000 Prize 'osays.

                          PtVietzl,
         0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0



  THE above is the title of a pamphlet recently issued. In its pages,
the author reviews the two most recent. and without doubt the best,
contributions to the defense of Sunday, popularly called the " Lord's
Day." The first of these essays was written by Rev. George El-
liott, and took the $500 " Fletcher Prize," offered by the trustees of
Dartmouth College for the best essay on the " Perpetual Obligation
of the Lord's Day."
 The other Essay was written by A. E. Waffle, M. A., and was
awarded a $1,000 prize by the Committee of Publication of the
American Sunday-School Union.
  We state thus definitely the source of the Essays reviewed that all.
may see their importance. Certainly if there was any argument in
favor of Sunday, we should expect to find it in these prize essays.
Elder Jones in his Review takes op their arguments and assertions,
and shows very plainly that several times the authors have proved
what they did not want to prove at all—namely: That the Seventh-
day Sabbath is still as binding on, all as when the law was given.
  This Review will be read with interest and profit by all, and those
who have friends that are interested in the Sabbath Question should
see that one of these pamphlets is placed in their hands
   176 pages, post-paid, 20 Cents.       Address Orders to

               Pacific Press Publishiro Company,
                                                    Oakland, Cal.
rinrizonoonnricomoririnnamminutnowninEnnorm
  SPECIAL HELPS
IZINCIOICILILUEECIZICEICE1001010021010INICULEKCLIOLICI

                IN THE STUDY OF THE LESSONS ON



OLD TESTAMENT
     VHISTORY
               --WILL BE FOUND IN THE—


Signs of the Times.
    This well-known expository journal will contain the Sabbath-school
lessons in full. Each lesson will be accompanied by fresh, original notes
prepared especially for the SIGNS, and not to be found anywhere else.
Difficult texts will be briefly and pointedly commented upon, with a view of
making clear the main points of the lesson. No student in the Senior
Division should fail to use the Signs of the Times in preparing for the
class exercise.
              Price, per year, post-paid.. . .......       $2 oo
              In clubs of five or more copies to one name
                and address, each                          r 5o
                                 •
    Address,                  SIGNS OF THE TIMES,
                       Twelfth and Castro Streets, OAKLAND, CAL.


           Sabbath-School Lessons
                             —ON

Old Testament                                   HISTORY,
   Containing Lessons for the Senior Division from Jan. to June, '89,.
Published by International Sabbath-School Association, Price, Ten Cents.

                Address, PACIFIC PRESS, OAKLAND, CAL.
       - PATHER_S --- D
      c.
                              • OF THE

Catholic ----------Th
  C-
   - - -'
        --- Church.
     History repeats itself, because human nature is the same in all ages of
the world. Hence, he who would know how to avoid error in the future,
must know how errors have developed in the past. The "Fathers of the
Catholic Church" shows the condition of the heathen world at the time of
Christ, briefly states the principles of ancient heathen ph losophy, and
shows how the adoption of these principles by prominent men in the church,
and the incautious lowering of the standard of pure Christianity, developed
the papacy, which was simply a new phase of paganism. It shows that by
the time of Consfintine every phase of the papacy was fully developed, and
was only waiting for supreme power. The chapter on SUN-WORSHIP
AND SUNDAY is alone worth the price of the book. Fine English cloth,
substantially bound, contains about 40o pages, and will be sent post-paid at
the nominal price of $5.00.     Address all orde
                                              rs to the
                  PACIFIC PRESS PUBLISHING CO.,
                                   Oakland, California.
        SOMETHING         NEW AND ORIGINAL.
         4Periergmew.onewv,


       ROPHETIC
            __________-_\,--

                 -------34
                                              6TO
                                                      IGHTS.
                                                _,«___«___-,<___..
                 C.-Z-    ,-,TTJS'I` ISST_TED.----
                    -- ..:=-                        --;2:--
                                                        -D
     A book of essays on prophecy, showing the exact fulfillment of some
of the predictions of the Bible, concerning Egypt, Tyre, Babylon, Medo-
Persia, Greece, and Rome, also of the prophecies concerning the first
advent of Christ, which prove the inspiration of the Bib'e and give assur-
ance that other prophecies which are noted will as surely and exactly he
fulfilled. The book advances no theories, but deals with literal facts of
Bible and history.
      ELEGANTLY ILLUSTRATED.—The illustrations were designed especially
for this work, and area study in themselves. Everyone who has seen them
pronounces them superb.
      JUST THE BOOK FOR A HOLIDAY GIFT.—Nearly 200 large, octavo
pages, printed on an extra quality of paper, tine English cloth binding, with
an emblematic design side stamp. PRICE, POST-PAID, $1.25.
  Address,        PACIFIC PRESS PUBLISHING CO.,
                                  Oakland, Calif(,rma.
--                                                                         —
