ADULT
SABBATH SCHOOL
BIBLE STUDY GUIDE
Oct • Nov • Dec 2004




Daniel



                            SEVENTH-DAY
                       ADVENTIST CHURCH
                        Let Ellen G. White
                         help you study!
         E. G. White Notes for the Adult Bible
        Study Guide is an indispensable study
        tool designed to help you gain new
        insights and fresh perspectives from
        your Sabbath School Bible study.
         This attractive booklet contains E. G.
        White comments addressing the topics
        of the day, week, and quarter in the
        Adult Bible Study Guides.
         Don't miss out! Start getting more
        from your daily Bible study with E. G.
        White Notes today.
        Available at your Adventist Book Center.
        Call 1-800-765-6955 to order.

        Pacific Press® Publishing Association. Visit us at www.pacificpress.com
        © 2004 Prices subject to change.




    Scripture references other than from the King James Version quoted by permission in this Bible Study Guide for Fourth Quarter
2004 are as follows:

NASB. From the New American Standard Bible, copyright © the Lockman Foundation 1960, 1962, 1963, 1968, 1971, 1972, 1973,
1975, 1977. Used by permission.
NIV. Texts credited to the NIV are from the Holy Bible, New International Version. Copyright 0 1973, 1978, 1984, International
Bible Society. Used by permission of Zondervan Bible Publishers.
NKJV. Text credited to NKJV are from the New King James Version. Copyright © 1979, 1980, 1982 by Thomas Nelson, Inc. Used
by permission. All rights reserved.
NRSV. From the New Revised Standard Version of the Bible, copyright © 1989 by the Division of Christian Education of the
National Council of the Churches of Christ in the USA. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
RSV. From the Revised Standard Version Bible, copyright 1946, 1952, 1971, by the Division of Christian Education of the National
Council of the Churches of Christ in the U.S.A. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

Adult Sabbath School Bible Study Guide (ISSN 1096-7400) (Standard Edition). Published quarterly by Pacific Press' Publishing Association,
1350 N. Kings Road, Nampa, ID 83687-3193, U.S.A. One-year subscription in U.S.A., $8.96; single copy, $3.99. One-year subscription to
countries outside U.S.A., $12.96; single $3.99. All prices at U.S.A. exchange. Periodicals postage paid at Nampa, Idaho. When a change of
address is desired, please send both old and new addresses.

POSTMASTER: Send address changes to Adult Sabbath School Bible Study Guide (Standard Edition), P.O. Box 5353, Nampa, ID 83653-
5353. Printed in the United States of America.

Editions in Braille available. Contact Christian Record Services, Box 6097, Lincoln, NE 68506.
Easy Reading Edition available. Contact Pacific Press`, 1350 N. Kings Road, Nampa, ID 83687.

Copyright 2004 by the Office of the Adult Bible Study Guide, General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists, 12501 Old Columbia Pike,
Silver Spring, MD 20904-6600, USA.
Adult Sabbath School Bible Study Guide (ISSN 1096-7400)/No. 438/October-December 2004.
    Contents
    "To Eat or Not to Eat—That Is the Question"
    —September 25—October 1                                                         6

 2 Nebuchadnezzar's Image—October 2 8                                              14

 3 The Fiery Furnace—October 9-15                                                  22

 4 Nebuchadnezzar's Judgment—October 16-22                                         30

 5 Surprise    Party—October 23 29                                                 38

 6 An Ancient Death       Decree—October 30—November 5                             16

 7 Daniel's History Lesson—November 6-12                                           56

 8 The Pre-Advent Judgment—November 13 19                                          64

 9 The Sanctuary Attacked—November 20-26                                           72

1 0 The Sanctuary Cleansed—November 27—December 3                                  80

1 1 God's Timetable—December 4 10                                                  88

1 2 When Kings Go to War—December 11 17                                            96

13 The Time of the End (or the End of Time)—December 18-24-104


     Editorial Office 12501 Old Columbia Pike, Silver Spring, MD 20904

     Principal Contributor                      Editorial Assistant
      Gerhard Handl                             Larie S. Gray
      Editor                                    Pacific Press® Coordinator
      Clifford R. Goldstein                     Paul A. Hey
      Associate Editor                          Art Director and Illustrator
      Lyndelle Brower Chiomenti                 Lars Justinen
      Publication Manager                       Concept Design
      Soraya Homayouni Parish                   Dever Design


      The Adult Sabbath School Bible Study Guide is prepared by the Office of the Adult
      Bible Study Guide of the General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists. The
      preparation of the guides is under the general direction of the Sabbath School
      Publications Board, a subcommittee of the General Conference Administrative
      Commitee (ADCOM), publisher of the Bible study guides. The published guide
      reflects the input of worldwide evaluation committees and the approval of the
      Sabbath School Publications Board and thus does not solely or necessarily repre-
      sent the intent of the author(s).

                                                                                     1
    INTRODUCTION




Daniel, Aristotle,
and the End
About four centuries before Christ, the Greek philosopher
Aristotle wrote about "the end," meaning the final purpose of
things, that to which "all things aim." For Aristotle, "the end
of the medical art is health, that of shipbuilding a vessel, that of strategy
victory, that of economics wealth." Applying this principle to humanity, he
said that the end of humanity, its ultimate purpose, is "happiness"—that
which we seek "always for itself and never for the sake of something else."
   Not a bad conclusion for someone working without revealed knowledge.
But although happiness can certainly be a laudable goal, it hardly answers
the crucial questions about the end and purpose of life, especially when that
life always ends in the grave, where the issue of happiness is, indeed, rather
irrelevant.
   In contrast to Aristotle, the prophet Daniel (a few hundred years earlier)
also wrote about "the end" but from a radically different perspective. For
Daniel, the end wasn't found within humans themselves as some natural
result of who and what they were; instead, the end was something brought
about by the supernatural intervention of an all-knowing, all-powerful God
who promised that "the end"—meaning the end of this world—was, in fact,
the beginning of a new one. In short, while Aristotle looked within human-
ity for its end, Daniel (as do all the Bible writers) puts the end in something
that transcends humanity, and that is the God who first created humanity.
   How thankful we should be, too, because if our "end," our purpose, were
limited only to ourselves, it hardly seems worth the effort to reach that end.
Why expend all the energy and pain of eking out an existence here, only to
have it all culminate in death? In contrast, Daniel shows that "the end" is,
really, a new beginning.
   Of course, one of the great purposes of the Bible is to show us not only
what our ends are but how we can reach those ends. The book of Daniel, our
topic for the next three months, fulfills a unique role in helping us do just that.
In it are impressive prophecies that, perhaps better than anywhere else in
Scripture, help establish a firm and rational foundation for our faith in the
One who, through the work of Jesus Christ, has assured us our end: eternal
life in a new creation (Isa. 66:22).
   Whether through the stories (where we are shown God's intervention in the
lives of individuals) or through the grand, sweeping prophecies (where we are
shown God's sovereignty over the world), the book of Daniel not only reveals
the presence of God in our world but, in a sense, helps prove that existence
and intervention.
   Daniel belongs to what is called "apocalyptic" literature. "Apocalyptic"
comes from the Greek apokalypsis, meaning "an unveiling" or "a revelation."

2
The apocalyptic books of Daniel and Revelation describe, by means of sym-
bolic visions, important stages of human history. But even more so, they
reveal to us "the end"—that is, the end of all things as they are now but not
what they will be forever.
   Throughout the Christian Era, the stories and prophecies of Daniel have
inspired poets, artists, and philosophers. They have given comfort and hope
to the weary; yet, at the same time they have challenged the minds of his-
torians and theologians.
Above all, the book has
shown that our world is
                              Anyone can write history;
not an iceberg drifting       only inspiration can tell
toward some unknown
and unforseen end but         the future.
that, behind the scenes
and in ways we cannot imagine or now understand, our God is working to
bring all things to a grand and glorious conclusion.
   "As we near the close of this world's history, the prophecies recorded by
Daniel demand our special attention, as they relate to the very time in which
we are living."—Ellen G. White, Prophets and Kings, p. 547.
    Even Jesus Himself points us specially to Daniel, saying, "When ye there-
fore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet,
stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:)" (Matt. 24:15;
see also Mark 13:14).
    Considering the importance of the book of Daniel, it shouldn't be surpris-
 ing that the enemy would hate it and has gone to extraordinary lengths to
 weaken its impact. For instance, though Daniel himself in various chapters
 dates his writing, higher critical scholars dismiss those dates as fabrications,
 placing the book hundreds of years later and focusing it on events that are not
 the concern of Daniel. In this way, by arguing that Daniel wrote after the
 events he described, scholars weaken the impact of the book and the power-
 ful prophecies within it. After all, anyone can write history; only inspiration
 can tell the future. As Seventh-day Adventists, we must firmly reject the
 humanistic attempts to undercut the supernatural origins of these writings.
    This quarter's Bible study guide was written by Gerhard Pfandl, an associ-
 ate director at the Biblical Research Institute at the General Conference. A
 native of Austria, where he pastored and taught for almost twenty years,
 Dr. Pfandl also worked for several years in California and Australia. He is
 married and has two grown children. A longtime student of Daniel, he is more
 than qualified to teach us about a book that so powerfully and convincingly
 reveals an end that Aristotle—with all his knowledge—never could have
  imagined or even dared to hope for.


                                                                               3
   Got
Questions?
    Sabbath School
 University has answers!
   Sabbath School University is a
28-minute discussion of the Adult
Bible Study Guide. SSU discusses the
lesson content and strategies to enrich
your Sabbath School with fellowship,
outreach, Bible study, and missions.
Sabbath School leaders, don't miss this
weekly broadcast on the Adventist
Television Network.




        http://Adventist.TV
           broadcast and program information
 Meeting Agenda:
        Lag Zpict                                        ❑
        /ffsealiwidows                                   ❑
        Rood de c%ett.-e%                                ❑


 Pastors around the world attend workers' meetings to
  lay plans for the future. In Russia "Workers' Meeting"
takes on a new meaning. They come not in suits, carrying
    notepads, but in their work clothes, carrying tools.
   In Moscow, where these pastors live, the city of 8.3
       million people has only one Adventist church.
 Your Thirteenth Sabbath Offering this quarter will help
               check off these agenda items!



             MISSI N
            The Thirteenth Sabbath Offering on December 25
              supports projects in the Euro-Asia Division.
           LESSON 1                   *September 25-October 1


      "To Eat or Not to Eat
      That Is the Question"
                ♦                              ••                    ,
       v-ak           -dor al


       SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 1.
Memory Text: "Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my
       path" (Psalm 119:105, NIV).

               pril 1945, the Pacific. In the midst of a fierce battle, about eighty

      A        war-hardened American soldiers owed their lives to one man,
               Private Desmond Doss. They once had ridiculed him for his
      refusal to carry a gun. However, while enemy crossfire cut down soldier
      after soldier, the medic, Private Doss, ignoring the danger to his own life,
      dragged more than seventy-five wounded men to safety. The man who
      was once a butt of their jokes became their hero.
         Doss was not afraid to stand up for what he believed, and he was not
      afraid to stand up on the battlefield. For his outstanding bravery, Doss
      was awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor by the president of
      the United States.
         This week we'll take a look at another war, another battle, fought in
      another part of the world in totally different circumstances. Yet, whatever
      the circumstances, some people (often a minority) will, like Private Doss,
      stand for what they believe, no matter the personal cost. Who were these
      people, what did they stand for, and what can we—who, in our own situ-
      ations, often face similar challenges—learn from their example?

The Week at a Glance: What do Babylon and Jerusalem
       symbolize? What caused the demise of Jerusalem? Why did inno-
       cent people have to suffer in the onslaught? Why didn't Daniel eat
       the king's food?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, October 2.
6
                 SUNDAY September 26


     A Tale of Two Cities: Babylon and
     Jerusalem (Dan. 1:1).
       The book of Daniel is the story of two cities, Jerusalem and Babylon.
     One represents the rule of righteousness, the other of wickedness. One
     reveals the mystery of godliness, the other the mystery of sin. Thus, the
     stories and prophecies of the book illustrate the principles of the great
     controversy between Christ and Satan, often manifested before us as a
     battle between good and evil, right and wrong, truth and error.
        The first time we read of Babylon and Jerusalem in Scripture is
     implied in the book of Genesis (11:9, 14:18); the last time we hear of
     them is in the book of Revelation (18:21, 21:10). And, in one way or
     another, either literally or figuratively they appear all through the Bible.

What were the historical circumstances under which the two cities
     (under similar but not exact names) are first mentioned?

     • Babylon (Gen. 11:1-9)

     • Jerusalem (Gen. 14:17-20)

       Babylon: The Babylonians derived the name of their city from Bab-ilu,
     which means "gate of god." According to Genesis 11:9, however, the
     name means "confusion," because there "the Lord confused the language
     of all the earth" (NKJ'V). There seems to be a play on words, for the two
     Hebrew words balal, "to confuse," and babel, "gate of god," sound very
     similar. While the people's intent at Babel was to build a tower that would
     reach into heaven, God turned it into a symbol of humanity's folly.
       Jerusalem: The Hebrew word shalem means "complete" or "peaceful."
     In Psalm 76:2, Jerusalem is identified with Salem, the city mentioned in
     Genesis 14:18. At the time of David's conquest of the city, Jerusalem was
     occupied by the Jebusites (I Chron. 11:4-7). From David's reign on, it
     had been the capital of the Jewish nation.

What is symbolized by the city of Babylon in the book of Revelation?
      Rev. 14:8; 16:19; 17:5; 18:2, 10, 21. What is its ultimate fate?

       Jerusalem ("peaceful, complete"), Babylon ("confusion"). You
       can't live in two places at once, either physically or spiritually.
       Where are you living now (spiritually), why are you there, and—if
       you need to move—how can you?




                                                                                7
                  MONDAY September 27


     The Innocent and the Guilty (Dan. 1:2-7).
       "In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah,
     Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it.
     And the Lord delivered Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand"
     (Dan. 1:1, 2, NIV).

       It's hard, from our perspective, to realize just how incredible those
     words in the above two texts are. If written in a newspaper, they would be
     headlines standing six to ten inches tall. Here was Jerusalem, where the
     Lord dwelt in His temple, taken over by pagans and its king captured!

What were some reasons why God gave Judah and Jerusalem into the
     hands of the Babylonians?

     • 2 Kings 21:10-16



     • 2 Kings 24:18-20



        2 Chron. 36.•15-17



     • Jer 3:13



       "It should be remembered that the promises and the threatenings of
     God are alike conditional."—Ellen G. White, Evangelism, p. 695. The
     people of Judah could have avoided the Babylonian exile. Through
     Jeremiah God pleaded with the people to return to Him. Had they
     repented, they would not have been punished (Jer 4:1-4). But they
     refused to listen, and, finally, judgment was poured out upon them.
        All this, however, brings up another question: Sure, the leaders rebelled
     and didn't obey. But why should the innocent be punished, as well? It
     hardly seems fair that Daniel and his three friends, godly young men,
     should suffer for the sins of others. Yet, as we all eventually learn, life in
     this sinful world isn't fair. That's, of course, why we must have the hope
     of a new one.



8
                TUESDAY September 28


      Daniel's Determination (Dan. 1:8).
        Being served the best food that the kingdom of Babylon had to
      offer, Daniel and his friends refuse to eat it. Why would they not eat
      the king's food? Prov. 23:1-3, 29-32. What principles are being
      expressed by these texts?




         Daniel and his friends refused to be conformed to the world; the will
      of God, instead, was the all-absorbing purpose of their lives. Hence, they
      might have refused to eat the king's fare because:
         1.Some of the food was unclean meat (Leviticus 11).
         2. Even the clean meat was not prepared the way Moses had instructed
      the Israelites (Lev 7:22-27).
         3. Eating and drinking involved an act of idol worship because the food
      was first offered to idols.
         When Daniel requested a different menu, he used the word vegetables
      (zero 'im), which is the same word God used in Genesis 1:29 when He
      told Adam, "I have given you every herb that yields seed (zorea'; zera)"
      (NKJI9. With this request Daniel affirmed his faith in the Creator, who
      gave us all that is good and healthy to eat.

Read Daniel 1:8. Here they are, captives in a foreign land, at the mercy
      of heathens who, on a whim, could have them killed. How easy it
      could have been to have rationalized eating the king's food and
      drinking his wine. Keeping this background in mind, look up the fol-
      lowing texts. What are they saying that relates to what Daniel did
      here? What lessons are there for us? Matt. 10:22, Luke 8:11-15, 1 Cor
      10:13, Phil. 3:8, 2 Tim. 2:12.


         Daniel's decision in regard to the king's food showed that he under-
      stood the connection between health and holiness. The test over food was
      one of the means of strengthening his character and fitting him for future
      greatness. Each right decision carried out in spite of difficulties makes a
      person stronger. Each resolution broken leaves a person weaker.
         The story of Daniel illustrates that a right decision bravely carried
      out often becomes the turning point in a person's life and a determin-
      ing factor in that person's destiny. "God gives opportunities; success
      depends upon the use made of them."—Ellen G. White, Prophets and
      Kings, p. 486.



                                                                               9
         WEDNESDAY September 29


      The Test (Dan. 1:9-16).
         When Daniel and his three friends arrived in Babylon, they were given
      new names, had to study the arts and sciences of the Babylonians, and
      were expected to eat from the king's table. The first few issues presented
      no great problem for them. The last matter, however, became a challenge
      to their faith.
         The hard question often is, How does one know where to draw the line?
      After all, in the ancient world, names often came with spiritual signifi-
      cance (Daniel, for instance, means "God is judge"). Couldn't Daniel have
      refused this name change simply on principle? Or could he have refused
      to study the Babylonian arts and sciences, because they were filled with
      divination, paganism, and other things in which he surely didn't believe?
      There's no record, though, of them refusing anything, at least not at this
      point, except the food. Here they drew the line.

Read again Daniel 1:8. Why did Daniel believe it would have been
      wrong for him to have eaten that food?




Who else, besides these Hebrew boys, was facing a risk by their refusal to
      eat? Dan. 1:10. Why would this have given them, if they wanted, a
      good excuse to back down and do what the king asked?


         At first glance, this test over eating and drinking seems fairly insignif-
      icant. But then, the test for Adam and Eve, not to eat of the tree of good
      and evil (Genesis 3), also seemed rather trivial. It, too, concerned
      appetite. But isn't it true that love is often revealed in the little things peo-
      ple do for one another? Perhaps there is a spiritual lesson in the fact that
      great doors often swing on little hinges. Genesis 3 and Daniel 1 illustrate
      the fact that Satan usually endeavors to reach us through our senses;
      through what we hear, see, smell, touch, and taste. Successful Christian
      living, therefore, depends on guarding our senses. Indeed, if God's Spirit
      reaches us through the nerve cells in our brain, and if these nerve cells are
      influenced by what we eat and drink, what more important duty could
      there be than that of preserving our bodies in the best possible condition?

       Put yourself in Daniel's place. Write out a paragraph justifying
       why you should eat the king's food. Is what you wrote convincing?
       If so, why should that concern you about how easily we can talk
       ourselves into compromising our faith?


10
             THURSDAY September 30

      The Reward (Dan. 1:17-20).
        At the end of the three-year period, Ashpenaz brought the young
      men before the king, who tested them. What were the blessings that
      came to the four young Hebrews as a result of their decision to
      remain loyal to their God? Dan. 1:20.




         Apart from the fact that they were the best in their class, they had clear
      minds and healthy bodies. Their experience indicates that God will bless
      all who are not afraid to be considered narrow and overscrupulous when
      tempted to yield their religious principles. In this instance, in a clear and
      undeniable way, their faithfulness to the Lord paid off in a manner in
      which all could see the results of their faithfulness.
         Sometimes, however, the immediate endings turn out differently, do
      they not?

Contrast the fate of the four Hebrew boys to Stephen's. What do these
     two stories tell us about what can happen when one remains faithful
     to biblical principles? Why, for Christians, should these endings,
     happy and tragic, make no real difference regarding the choice of
     whether or not to stay faithful to religious principles?




         On the immediate level, things turned out quite well for Daniel and the
      three Hebrew boys, certainly better than they did for Stephen.
         As Christians, though, we know that whatever happens to us here, bad
      or good, whether being stoned to death or exalted to the head of the
      class—these outcomes are not the end. Instead, there's an eternity await-
      ing us, a whole new life in a new heaven and a new earth where sin, death,
      suffering, and loss will no longer exist. In contrast to that, it hardly mat-
      ters what our end here is; what matters, instead, is that we stay faithful to
      God and what He asks of us, regardless of the immediate consequences.

        What would you say to someone who has been, all his or her life,
        compromising Christian principles yet who wants to change?
        What hope could you offer him or her that all is not lost?


                                                                               11
                   FRIDAY October 1


Further Study: Read Ellen G. White, Prophets and Kings, pp. 479-490.
How did Daniel and his three friends manage to study the learning and
      scientific knowledge of the Babylonians and yet not become influ-
      enced by the superstition and sorcery included in this training?

      •   Through the right exercise of the will: "Through the right exercise of
          the will, an entire change may be made in your life. By yielding up
          your will to Christ, you ally yourself with the power that is above all
          principalities and powers. You will have strength from above to hold
          you steadfast, and thus through constant surrender to God you will be
          enabled to live the new life, even the life of faith."—Ellen G. White,
          Steps to Christ, p. 48.
      •   Through the recognition of the influence of the body on the mind:
          "Daniel's parents had trained him in his childhood to habits of strict
          temperance. They had taught him that he must conform to nature's
          laws in all his habits; that his eating and drinking had a direct influ-
          ence upon his physical, mental, and moral nature, and that he was
          accountable to God for his capabilities; for he held them all as a gift
          from God, and must not, by any course of action, dwarf or cripple
          them. As the result of this teaching, the law of God was exalted in his
          mind, and reverenced in his heart."—Ellen G. White, Counsels on
          Diet and Foods, p. 154.
      •   Through a consistent life of prayerful dependence upon God: Daniel
          "was surrounded with influences calculated to subvert those who
          would vacillate between principle and inclination; yet the Word of
          God presents him as a faultless character. Daniel dared not trust to his
          own moral power. Prayer was to him a necessity."—Ellen G. White,
          The Sanctified Life, p. 20.

Discussion Question:
       Imagine how easily Daniel and his three friends could have justi-
       fied not cooperating with their Babylonian captors. After all,
       these were pagans who had destroyed their city and taken them
       captive. Wouldn't death be better than working with these hea-
       then at all, much less becoming important officials in the court
       of the very king who had destroyed their nation? What can we
       learn from the answer to this question?

Summary: Daniel and his three friends are pressured to conform to the
      customs of the Babylonians. But they remain true to their God, and He
      rewards them with exceptional wisdom and insight. By their commitment
      to God and faith in Him, they became examples for every Christian
      tempted to compromise.



12
                                        INSIDE
                                                                     Story
                                                                 ••••••••••'




          The Lucky One
          Jim Zachary
             George never knew his parents. He lived with his grandmother in Kenya
          until she died. Then he was taken to his great-aunt's home to live. When
          life became unbearable, George ran away. He was 9 years old. For five
          years he lived on the streets of Nairobi, Kenya, begging for money and
          searching for food in garbage cans.
             Then something happened that turned George's life around. A
          Pathfinder Club was having an outing. Each Pathfinder had brought along
          three extra lunches, planning to share them with the homeless children of
          Nairobi.
             The club members went into the poorest part of town and invited the
          street children to join them in a city park for lunch and games. The pro-
          gram included a spiritual talk. This was the first time some of the children
          had heard about Jesus. Then the children played games together.
             George heard shouts and laughter as he sifted through the trash for food.
          Curious, he went closer. Wow, he thought, those kids look sharp in their
          uniforms. Someone invited George to join in the fun. How good it was to
          enjoy a decent, fresh meal and play games with other children. For a few
          hours George forgot his troubles.
             As the party wound down, George said, "I wish that I could become a
          Pathfinder." When someone asked why, he answered, "I want to be like
          them—and I want to go to school." The Pathfinder leader told George,
          "Meet me here in this park in two days."
             When the leader returned two days later, he told George that he had
          arranged for him to enroll in the Adventist school as a boarding student.
          George, now 14, could not believe his ears. He had not yet completed the
           fourth grade, so he had a lot of catching up to do. Life was so different at
           the school. Good food replaced garbage scraps, and he slept on a mat in a
           warm room, not on the sidewalk. He no longer had to run away when a
           police officer came by.
             "I am so happy," George said. "Life is good; I can go to school." George
           has joined the baptismal class. George is studying hard and ranked second
           in academic standing in his class. He has made friends and recently was
           elected to a student-body office.
             Some 5,000 children live on the streets of Nairobi. George is a lucky
           one, for he has found his future, and it includes a loving church family.

           J. H. Zachary was coordinator of international evangelism for The Quiet Hour.




111101111PProduced by the General Conference Sabbath SoillallirlIonalifistries Dept.
          Email:gomission@gc.adventist.org
          LESSON             2       *October 2-8



      Nebuchadnezzar's Image




      SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 2.
Memory Text: " 'He changes the times and the seasons; He
      removes kings and raises up kings; He gives wisdom to the wise and
      knowledge to those who have understanding" (Daniel 2:21, NKJV).

              ears ago, a psychic named Cheiro warned editor W. T. Stead not

      y       to travel by water during April 1912. Stead lost his life, in April
              1912, on the Titanic. In the summer of 1961, psychic Jeane
      Dixon foretold that United Nations Secretary-General Dag Hammar-
      skjold would be killed in a "plane crash in mid-September." On
      September 18, 1961, the secretary-general was killed in a plane crash.
         What does this prove? Only that Satan certainly can make predictions
      and then bring about their fulfillment, nothing more (if even that).
         Nevertheless, prophecies dealing with the future of nations hundreds
      and thousands of years in advance—such as Nebuchadnezzar's dream as
      depicted in Daniel 2—are found in the writings of the Bible, not in the
      prognostications of psychics. This dream and Daniel's inspired explana-
      tion are part of the primary evidence for the inspiration of Scripture.
         This week we'll take another look at this faith-affirming prophecy.

The Week at a Glance: What kind of test did the king put
      to the wise men in order to be sure of their interpretation? How is
      God's power revealed in this chapter? What does Daniel 2 teach us
      about God? In what ways does this chapter expose our basic human
      helplessness and dependence upon God?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, October 9.


14
                 SUNDAY October 3


     Nebuchadnezzar's Dilemma (Dan. 2:1-13).
       One night King Nebuchadnezzar had an impressive dream. When
     he awoke, he called his wise men and asked them to tell him what he
     had dreamed. Did Nebuchadnezzar really forget his dream, or did he
     just want to test the wise men of Babylon to see if they were as clever
     as they claimed? Dan. 2:5.


        The King James Version, following the Septuagint (the Greek transla-
     tion of the Old Testament), translates the first words of the king (vs. 5) as
     "the thing is gone from me"—generally understood to mean that the king
     had forgotten the dream. Modern translations, following the Aramaic
     text, render the phrase as " 'my decision is firm"' (NKJ10. Both transla-
     tions may be true. Having forgotten part of the dream, the king used this
     fact to test the wise men. If he had forgotten the dream completely, he
     would not have been troubled by it.
        "The Lord in His providence had a wise purpose in view in giving
     Nebuchadnezzar this dream, and then causing him to forget the particu-
     lars, but to retain the fearful impression made upon his mind. The Lord
     desired to expose the pretensions of the wise men of Babylon."—Ellen
     G. White, in The Youth's Instructor, Sept. 1, 1903.
        Nebuchadnezzar probably was afraid of the meaning of the dream.
     Angry that the wisest men of Babylon were unable to help him, he
     ordered them all killed. This was no idle threat: Cutting up the bodies of
     enemies and burning their houses were common practices in ancient
     Mesopotamia.

In response to the king's threat, what truth were the wise men
     forced to admit? Dan. 2:11.


        Unable to tell the king his dream, the wise men of Babylon had to
     admit that only the gods, "whose dwelling is not with flesh," could tell the
     king his dream. The Babylonians did not think that the gods would come
     and dwell in human flesh, but Christians know that God indeed "became
     flesh and dwelt among us" (John 1:14, NKJTO. This confession of failure
     provided a remarkable opportunity for Daniel to reveal something of the
     God whom he served.

      The wise men are admitting their helplessness. Martin Heidegger
      once said that "Only a God can save us." This seems to be the con-
      fession of the wise men, as well. Look at your situation. Are you
      able to admit your own helplessness? How, then, is the knowledge
      that there not only is a God but that He's the God revealed to us in
      Jesus able to comfort you no matter your own situation?

                                                                               15
                  MONDAY October 4


      Daniel's Prayer Meetings (Dan. 2:14-23).
What can we learn from the response of Daniel and his friends to the
      king's death decree? Dan. 2:17, 18.


         Throughout the book of Daniel, God's people are threatened by death.
      This is of special relevance to the believers living at the end of time, for
      they will have to face the threat of death, as well (see Rev. 13:13-18).
         The prayer meeting Daniel and his friends had that day must have been
      intense. Their lives hung in the balance, but they could approach God
      with confidence, because, to the best of their knowledge and ability, they
      had served Him thus far. After God had revealed to Daniel in a night
      vision what Nebuchadnezzar had dreamed, they still prayed, this time giv-
      ing Him praise and thanksgiving.

What are some of the key phrases of Daniel's prayer of thanksgiving in
      Daniel 2:20-23?

      Dan. 2:20

      Dan. 2:21

      Dan. 2:22

      Dan. 2:23

         Note how Daniel begins his prayer with "Blessed be the name of God."
      In the Old Testament, people frequently bless the Lord (Judg. 5:9, Neh.
      9:5, Pss. 103:1, 134:1). The Aramaic and Hebrew words for "bless"
      also can be translated as "praise," and this is the meaning in Daniel 2:19
      and 20.
         Daniel's hymn of praise emphasizes that there is a divine Power who
      controls history. He's also a God who communicates intimately with
      those who are open to hear His voice. Through the dream of the image,
      God conveyed to Nebuchadnezzar the truth that He exercises His power
      not only in heaven but right here on earth.

       What do you say to someone who, after having read this part of
       Daniel 2, asks, But why haven't my prayers been answered in such
       a powerful and precise manner?




16
               TUESDAY October 5


    Daniel's Testimony (Dan. 2:24-30).
      How did Daniel respond to the fact that God had revealed the
    dream to him? Vss. 24-28.


      Notice that Daniel's first concern was for the wise men of Babylon.
    Although they had done nothing to earn this stay of execution, they were
    saved because of the presence of a righteous man in their midst.
    Throughout history such cases have been reported. On his journey to
    Rome, Paul's presence on the ship saved all those on board (Acts 27:24).
    Therefore, Jesus calls God's people "the salt of the earth" (Matt. 5:13);
    that is, they have a preserving quality, as illustrated in the life of Daniel.
    Indeed, just as our bad deeds can have a negative impact on those around
    us, our good deeds can have a good impact, an important point to
    remember for all who follow Christ.
      Having taken care of the wise men, Daniel stood before the king and
    explained that neither the wise men of Babylon nor their gods could do
    what the king demanded but that there was a God in heaven who could
    reveal secrets. Daniel was neither ashamed nor afraid to confess his God
    before the king. Yet, he disclaimed any superior wisdom or knowledge for
    himself as the reason for what he was going to tell the king. He ascribed
    the revelation and its explanation entirely to God. Daniel seemed to
    understand clearly that his relationship to his God and Savior was one of
    complete dependence. Of course, that's how salvation works, as well; we
    are completely dependent upon the Lord.

Look up these following texts. What do they tell us about the sheer
    impossibility of our being able to save ourselves? Rom. 3:23, 8:3,
    1 Cor 15:14-17.


        As sinners we have been irrevocably cut off from God, the Source of
     all life. But thanks to Jesus, who was both God and man, we have been
     restored to that Source of life. Only Someone who was God and man
     and not only man but a sinless man, a man who kept God's eternal and
     immutable law perfectly, could bridge the gap between heaven and
     earth, thus solving the one thing that we, of ourselves, can never solve:
     the problem of death.

      Daniel and his friends, under the threat of death, prayed. Of
      course, most people, even atheists, under such circumstances,
      would have done the same thing. Why do you think, in the case of
      these boys, however, that prayer was something they did all the
      time? In what ways might that fact help explain why their prayer
      was answered as it was?

                                                                               17
         WEDNESDAY October 6


      The Image and Its Interpretation (Dan. 2:28-45).
What is the meaning of Daniel's reference to "the latter days" in verse
      28? See also Gen. 49:1, Num. 24:14, Deut. 4:30, 31:29.


        A study of this phrase in the Old Testament shows that the "latter days,"
      an idiomatic phrase for "in the future," can refer to (a) a specific future
      period in the history of Israel (Deut. 4:30); (b) the future history of Israel
      beginning with the conquest (Gen. 49:1) or the monarchy (Num. 24:14);
      and (c) the Messianic age (Isa. 2:2, Hos. 3:5) or the time immediately
      preceding it (Ezek. 38:16). Most modern versions, therefore, translate this
      phrase as "in the days to come" (Gen. 49:1, NASB); "in time to come"
      (Deut. 31:29, NRSTO; or "in later days" (Deut. 4:30, NIJO.
        Thus, we can conclude that "the latter days" in Daniel 2 refers to the
      future, which began in the time of Daniel and reaches down to the time
      of the second advent of Christ symbolized by the stone kingdom.

What did God reveal to Nebuchadnezzar? What did these images sym-
      bolize? Dan. 2:30-45.


         The head of the golden image is clearly identified as the kingdom of
      Babylon (626-539 B.c.) in verse 38. From history we know that the other
      three kingdoms following Babylon were Media-Persia (539-331 B.c.),
      Greece (331-168 B.c.), and Rome (168 B.C.—A.D. 476). Although the
      Roman Empire ruled longer than the other three kingdoms put together,
      it was not succeeded by a fifth world power but was divided up into many
      different kingdoms of varied strength, symbolized by the feet of iron and
      clay—just as the prophecy had predicted. These are the nations that make
      up modern Europe, nations that, to this day, exist as separate national and
      political entities.

What is symbolized by the stone cut out without hands and the destruc-
      tion of the image? Dan. 2:34, 44.


        The Bible makes it plain that the stone represents Jesus Christ (see Isa.
      28:16; 1 Cor 10:4; Luke 20:17, 18), who at His second advent will
      destroy all the other kingdoms and establish an everlasting kingdom.

       Take the symbolism of what Christ does to these other powers at
       the Second Coming and apply it spiritually to yourself. What needs
       to happen within us, to the other "powers" within us, in order to
       truly follow the Lord as we should? See also Matt. 16:25, Gal. 2:20.


18
            THURSDAY October 7


     Daniel's Promotion
What was Nebuchadnezzar's reaction to Daniel's explanation of his
      dream? Dan. 2:46.


         At the end of Daniel's explanations, the king was convinced that his
      dream had indeed come from a supernatural force. He acknowledged the
      God of Daniel as the Ruler of the universe. He saw his own place in world
      history, and he understood that his authority was under the control of the
      God who had given it to him (vss. 46, 47).
         The prostration of the king before Daniel (vs. 46) was according to
      Oriental custom. He was ready to worship Daniel as some kind of god, sim-
      ilar to the Lycaonians and Miletians, who considered Paul a god (Acts
      14:11, 28:6). Paul refused to be worshiped, and we can be certain that
      Daniel responded in a similar way (though we do not have any record of his
      response). Nevertheless, the king made Daniel governor over the province
      of Babylon and head of all the wise men. In his elevation, Daniel experi-
      enced the divine principle proclaimed by Jesus, "For whosoever hath, to
      him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance" (Matt. 13:12).

What does Daniel's petition concerning his friends reveal about his char-
      acter? Dan. 2:49.


         The prophet did not want to enjoy his honors alone. In his hour of tri-
      umph, he remembered those who had joined in prayer with him. As soon
      as his position was decided, he requested the king to appoint his three
      friends to administer the affairs of the province of which he himself was
      made ruler. On the surface this request seems simple enough, but we must
      remember that native Babylonians probably had to give up their positions
      to make room for these unknown Jews. In God's providence the sharers in
      Daniel's prayer are now made sharers in his promotion. Unlike the chief
      butler in the story of Joseph (Gen. 40:23), Daniel did not forget his friends.
         God used Daniel's captivity and Nebuchadnezzar's dream to make
      Daniel a powerful force in Babylon. Joseph in Egypt had a similar experi-
      ence (Gen. 50:20). Both are examples of the biblical principle that "all
      things work together for good to those who love God" (Rom. 8:28,
      NKJV).

       Review the chapter. One lesson that should come through to us
       clearly and forcefully is that God is in control of the world's history.
       Compare this with what we saw in the life of Jesus and His intense
       personal care for individuals (see Matt. 10:29-31). How does what
       we've seen of God's power, as revealed in Daniel 2, help us to trust
       Him and His power in our personal lives, as well?

                                                                                19
                    FRIDAY October 8

Further Study: Read Ellen G. White, Prophets and Kings, pp. 491-502.
         "The king had acknowledged the power of God, saying to Daniel, 'Of
      a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, . . . and a revealer of secrets.'
      Verse 47. For a time afterward, Nebuchadne77ar was influenced by the
      fear of God; but his heart was not yet cleansed from worldly ambition and
      a desire for self-exaltation. The prosperity attending his reign filled him
      with pride. In time he ceased to honor God, and resumed his idol worship
      with increased zeal and bigotry"—Prophets and Kings, pp. 503, 504.

Lessons From Daniel 2
      1.The precise fulfillment of the prophecy of Daniel 2 in history is strong
         evidence for the inspiration of the Bible.
      2. The prophecy of Daniel 2 shows clearly that everything and everyone
        on this earth will eventually perish unless linked with God. We are all
        on our way to eternal nothingness unless we take hold of the hand of
        God.
      3. Frequently historians will tell us that "history teaches us that history
        teaches us nothing." While this may be true for some, Christians know
        that history is indeed the story of God working out His final plans to
         end the great controversy. Christ is not an absentee landlord, permitting
         His house to disintegrate through careless tenants. The correct study of
        history leads to the understanding and assurance that He who controls
        the cosmos also guides the atom.


Discussion Questions:
       O In what ways does Daniel 2 provide purely rational evidence
       not only for inspiration of the Bible but for God's power? Why, if
       studying with a skeptic, could you find some powerful material
       in this chapter?

       O In what sense do today's nations in the territories of ancient
       Rome resemble the feet of iron and clay?

Summary: Daniel 2 provides the blueprint for apocalyptic prophecy. It
    is foundational for the rest of the prophecies in this book.
    Nebuchadnezzar's dream revealed the ignorance of the wise men but pro-
    vided opportunity for Daniel to witness to the king about the God of
    heaven.




20
                            INSIDE
                                                                  urtil
The Gift
Goes On Barbara Huff
   Like many young people who attend the Adventist seminary in Zaoksky,
Russia, Yuri Zakhvataev (ZACH-vah-tah-yev) would never have been
there if it had not been for someone he does not know.
   Yuri was studying music at a state university when his mother invited
him to attend the Adventist church with her. Yuri went, and his heart
opened to God's message. He gave his life to Christ. Not long after his
conversion he sensed God was calling him into the ministry.
   Yuri did not have the money to study for four years at Zaoksky
Adventist Seminary, in Russia. But in faith Yuri applied to Zaoksky. He
learned that God, who had called him to the ministry, was calling others to
support students such as him who are called to become leaders in the
church. Someone sponsored Yuri, paying his tuition during his four years
at Zaoksky. Yuri spent his summer breaks working with experienced evan-
gelists and other students holding evangelistic meetings throughout the
Euro-Asia Division.
   Yuri completed his theology degree and is working in a church—affiliated
media center in Russia. He has a burden to minister to those addicted to
alcohol and drugs. Yuri has produced a TV series designed to point humans
 to Jesus, the greatest Man on earth.
    While conducting one stop-smoking program, he helped Vladimir suc-
 cessfully kick the smoking habit. Vladimir wanted to help others stop.
 Now Vladimir and Yuri conduct stop-smoking programs together.
 Vladimir has been baptized.
    Yuri knows that while God called him to become a minister, he could
 not have completed his education without the help of those who were
 faithful in supporting him. He can minister to others, because someone
 else answered God's whisper to help a young person, whom he or she
 might never meet, study in a school this person might never see.
    Yuri's message to those faith partners is, "Thank you for your financial
 support. With the Lord's blessing I will multiply your gift many times in
 souls won to Him."

   Barbara Huff met Yuri when she was administrative assistant in the Euro-Asia Division
office in Moscow. She and her husband are now retired in Florida.




Produced by the General Conference Sabba            and Per
Email:gomission@gc.adventustorg
           LESSON            3       *October 9-15



       The Fiery Furnace


            21)414Xd
       SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 3.
Memory Text:" 'When you pass through the waters, I will be with
       you; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow you. When you
       walk through the fire, you shall not be burned, nor shall the flame
       scorch you" (Isaiah 43:2, NKJV).

                 hen Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna, was brought before a tribunal,

       Nv        the proconsul said, " 'Swear by the fortune of Ceasar . . . swear
                 and I will release you; reproach Christ.'
        "Polycarp responded: 'Eighty and six years I have served Him, and He
      has done me no wrong. How can I speak evil of my King who saved me?'
        " 'I have wild beasts,' said the proconsul, 'and will expose you to them
      unless you repent.'
        " 'Call them!' said Polycarp, who, never relenting, died a martyr's
      death."—Adapted from Elon Foster, 6000 Sermon Illustrations (Grand
      Rapids: Baker, 1956), p. 273.
        This week we will see how three Hebrews, like Polycarp, faced a test
      concerning faithfulness and worship. The first battle in this world was
      over worship (Gen. 4:4-8, 1 John 3:12); the last will be, as well (Rev
      14:9-12). How important that we understand the issues involved.

The Week at a Glance: Why did Nebuchadnezzar have the
      golden image made? Who delivered the three boys, and of what is
      that deliverance symbolic? What is the difference between believing
      in God and knowing God?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, October 16.
22
                 SUNDAY             October 10


      The Image of Gold (Dan. 3:1-7).
         For a time after the vision in Daniel 2, Nebuchadnezzar was influ-
      enced by the fear of God. However, the prosperity attending his reign
      filled him with pride, and, in time, he resumed his idol worship. He
      determined to reproduce the image he had seen, but his image should be
      entirely of gold—symbolic of Babylon as an eternal, indestructible, all-
      powerful kingdom that should stand forever.

Why was the king's act of making the statue an act of defiance against
      what Daniel, in chapter 2, said would happen? See Dan. 2:34, 35.




         The event in Daniel 3 is not dated, but it must have been several years
      after the vision of Daniel 2 (603 B.c.). A possible date is 594 B.C., when
      Zedekiah, as ruler of Judah, was summoned to Babylon (Jer 51:59),
      most likely in connection with the dedication of the golden statue.

What did Nebuchadnezzar hope to achieve by inviting all the officials of
      the realm and demanding their worship of the golden statue? Dan.
      3:4-6.




         Kings in ancient times always had to be wary of the danger of an inter-
      nal revolt. A ceremony such as we find in this chapter, where all the offi-
      cials had to show public allegiance to the king, would have served well to
      bring them all into line. The act of bowing to the image would have indi-
      cated, at least outwardly, obedience and loyalty to the king himself.
         The death penalty for not bowing down to the idol seems rather harsh,
      but absolute monarchs or rulers in any age have never taken kindly to
      challenges to their authority. The king dared anyone to defy his power and
      authority, and the officials knew he meant it. The fiery furnace was no
      idle threat either. Jeremiah 29:22 records that the king burned to death
      two Jewish men called Zedekiah and Ahab. This makes the stand of the
      three Hebrews all the more remarkable.

       Nebuchadnezzar, obviously, struggled with his legacy—he wanted
       it to last forever. We all, to some degree, struggle with this same
       problem, the sense of our own mortality and transience. What's
       our only hope, and why? See 1 John 2:16, 17.

                                                                              23
                  MONDAY October 11


      Three Hebrews Defy the King (Dan. 3:8-18).
Who reported to the king that Daniel's friends refused to bow down to his
      image? Dan. 3:8. What possibly motivated them to tell the king?


        In so vast a crowd, the king probably could not see that three men
      were still standing, and certain men went to him to inform him. These
      Chaldeans were, more than likely, jealous of the honors bestowed on
      the three Hebrews, and they gladly took the opportunity to report
      them.

What is the relationship between the images in Daniel 3 and Revelation
      13:11-18?




         Prophecy tells us that in the last days another image will be set up to
      enforce religious uniformity. A universal economic boycott and ulti-
      mately a death decree will be issued against all who refuse to worship
      "the beast and its image." Also, in both chapters, the number six, as a
      symbol of man under the control of Satan, is prominent (see Dan. 3:1).
      The worship of the golden image by the people in ancient Babylon is
      referred to six times (see Dan. 3:5, 7, 10, 12, 14, 18). And by God's
      design, in the book of Revelation, the warning against worshiping the
      beast and his image is also given six times (see Rev. 13:15; 14:9, 11;
      16:2; 19:20; 20:4).
         On the plain of Dura officials of all ranks attended. The ceremony of
      dedication was an act of worship of the power and might of
      Nebuchadnugar, which the three Hebrews refused to do. The whole
      story illustrates the close connection between state and religion. This kind
      of union has, in fact, characterized most nations throughout history. The
      idea of a secular state, one that keeps as much as possible out of the
      domain of religious affairs, is a fairly recent phenomenon.
         The conversation between the king and the three Hebrew youths is one
      of the most remarkable recorded in Scripture—an autocratic king and
      three young men who defy his order because of their belief in the God of
      the universe. What a scene!

       What are some things that now, today, we are tempted to worship?
       Are we, even as Christians, slowly but surely getting caught up in
       worshiping something other than God? How can we know if we
       are, and how can we protect ourselves from this subtle form of
       idolatry?

24
                TUESDAY October 12


      The Fiery Trial (Dan. 3:16-23).
What are the key elements in the response of the three young Hebrews
      to the king's death threat? Dan. 3:16-18. Rephrase what they said.


        The word deliver is a key word that appears throughout the book of
      Daniel. When Nebuchadnezzar asked them, " 'Who is the god who will
      deliver you from my hands?' " The three Hebrews replied that their God
      whom they served was " 'able to deliver' " them from his hands (Dan.
      3:15, 17, NKJV). After the miracle in the fiery furnace, the king con-
      fessed, " 'there is no other God who can deliver like this"' (vs. 29, NKJV).
      Daniel's experience in chapter 6 illustrates further that the God whom
      Daniel served is "able to deliver" His people. Finally, at the end of the
      book we read that at the end of time Michael, the Great Prince, shall stand
      up to deliver everyone who is found written in the book of life (Dan.
      12 : I).

Why did the three Hebrews refuse to compromise in this matter of bow-
      ing to the golden image? Exod. 20:3-5.




Look up Matthew 10:28. How does this text apply here?

        In spite of the king's rage and fury, the three men would not bend or
      budge. They obeyed NebuchadnerJar as far as their conscience permit-
      ted. They journeyed to the plain of Dura, but when their conscience told
      them, No farther, they refused to join the other worshipers, knowing that
      they had " 'to obey God rather than men' " (Acts 5:29, NKITO. They
      refused to break God's law, which forbade idol worship, regardless of
      whether or not God would deliver them.
         Throughout Christian history there have been those who have
      responded similarly. Fox's Book of Martyrs traces the lives of thousands
      of Christians who were killed for their allegiance to God.

       Compromise is a favorite word of politicians. But is there a place for
       compromise when it comes to matters of faith? If so, in what way
       and under what circumstances? What things, if any, can or should
       be compromised? How can we tell if we are compromising or sim-
       ply being prudent?



                                                                               25
          WEDNESDAY October 13


      One Like the Son of God (Dan. 3:24, 25).
Read carefully Daniel 3:14, 15. The king asked the three boys a question
       at the end of verse 15. What was the question; how was it answered?


        "Who is the God who shall deliver you?" he asked. It was the same
      God who (in chapter 2) the king had confessed was " 'the God of gods,
      the Lord of kings' " (vs. 47, NKJV). How quickly, though, the king for-
      got. All through the Bible we can find similar examples of God mani-
      festing His power in a remarkable way, only for people to so quickly
      forget.

What did the words "Son of God" in verse 25 mean to Nebuchadnezzar?
       Did he recognize who the fourth Being really was?




        Verse 25 alternately can be translated "son of the gods," which simply
      means a supernatural being. In verse 28 Nebuchadne77ar identifies the
      fourth Being as an angel, but the biblical text does not indicate whether
      Nebuchadnezzar understood the true nature of the fourth Being.
        Christians, of course, understand the Son of God as Jesus Christ
      Himself (Matt. 8:29, Rom. 1:4, Heb. 7:3, 1 John 3:8). Here, in this
      chapter, we see a small foretaste of the total victory over death that
      Christ gives to all His followers at the end of time. He delivered these
      three boys in a remarkable manner then, and He will deliver all of His
      followers in even a more remarkable manner when He returns.

What do these texts tell us about the deliverance that we, as Christians, have
      in Christ? Rom. 7:24, Gal. 1:4, Col. 1:13, 1 T'hess. 1:10, 2 Tim. 4:18.




        Think about Nebuchadnezzar, who one chapter earlier praised
        the same God he now defied. In what ways do we find the same
        thing happening in us? God works something miraculous in our
        lives, and before long we are doubting and questioning Him.
        What can we do to protect ourselves from this common spiritual
        trap?



26
             THURSDAY October 14


      Nebuchadnezzar's Change of Mind
      (Dan. 3:26-30).

        When the three young Jews walked out of the fiery furnace with heads
      held high, the effect on the assembled multitude must have been tremen-
      dous. They saw that "the hair of their head was not singed nor were their
      garments affected, and the smell of fire was not on them" (Dan. 3:27,
      NKJV).
        Though there's a lot more involved in this account than what we have
      been told, it does seem clear that the Lord again revealed to this monarch
      His power and majesty in a way that did, indeed, reach the king. One
      might have thought that, after what He had already shown
      Nebuchadnezzar of His power (chapter 2), the Lord would have been
      through with the defiant and arrogant king. However, even despite this
      blatant act of defiance against Him, the Lord again showed His mercy
      and patience toward Nebuchadnezzar.

What other examples can we find in the Bible of the Lord giving power-
      ful leaders numerous chances? What do these accounts tell us about
      His character? What hope do they offer for us? See, for instance,
      Exodus 7-15, 2 Sam. 12:1-13. At the same time, what are the limita-
      tions of His patience with us?




What effect did the miracle in the fiery furnace have on the king? Dan.
      3:26-28.


        On the surface, then, it seems that the king certainly came to realize
      something of the might and power of the Lord of heaven and earth. Yet, as
      subsequent chapters will show, believing in God or even confessing His
      power isn't enough. The king needed, instead, to know the Lord (John
      17:3). This is a crucial distinction. Knowing God is more than just know-
      ing propositional truths about Him. The most unregenerate degenerate can
      believe in God's eternal nature, His creative power, and even His atoning
      death.

       It's one thing, though, to believe in the God of the Bible or to even
       acknowledge His power. Demons know about both (James 2:19).
       It's another thing to know Him as your Lord and Savior. Do you
       simply believe in God, or do you know Him (John 17:3)? Explain
       your answer. The answer makes all the difference in the world.


                                                                             27
                    FRIDAY October 15

Further Study: Read Ellen G. White, "The Fiery Furnace," in Prophets
      and Kings, pp. 503-513.

         According to Ellen White, Nebuchadnezzar understood who the fourth
      Being was: "How did that heathen king know what the Son of God was
      like? The Hebrew captives filling positions of trust in Babylon had in life
      and character represented before him the truth. When asked for a reason
      of their faith, they had given it without hesitation. Plainly and simply they
      had presented the principles of righteousness, thus teaching those around
      them of the God whom they worshiped. They had told of Christ, the
      Redeemer to come; and in the form of the fourth in the midst of the fire
      the king recognized the Son of God."—Prophets and Kings, p. 509.


Discussion Question:
       In Moby Dick, Herman Melville wrote about a man who was
       asked to worship the idol of his pagan roommate, Queequeg.
       Follow the logic of the man's reasoning. "I was a good Christian;
       born and bred in the bosom of the infallible Presbyterian
       Church. How then could I unite with this wild idolator in wor-
       shipping his piece of wood? ... But what is worship?—to do the
       will of God—that is worship. And what is the will of God?—to
       do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow man to do to
       me—that is the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fellow man.
       And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me? Why,
       unite with me in my particular Presbyterian form of worship.
       Consequently, I must then unite with him in his; ergo, I must
       turn idolator."—Moby Dick (New York: Washington Square
       Press, 1999), p. 70. What's wrong with this reasoning? What does
       this tell us about how easy it is to rationalize wrong spiritual
       decisions?

Summary: The three Hebrew boys refused to compromise where it
      mattered. As Christians, we need to know what matters and then never
      compromise on those things.




      28
                                 iNsIDEStory
      As Little Children
         It is easy to understand why children hold a special place in God's heart.
         When Kathy Seeley, primary-unit teacher in an Adventist Academy in
      the United States, saw her children fervently drawing pictures one day, she
      asked what they were doing. The children announced that they were going
      to sell the pictures. Mrs. Seeley smiled at their enthusiasm—until she saw
      the children selling their pictures in the parking lot for three cents each.
      The children brought the money to her and announced that it was for mis-
      sions.
         Then they made bookmarks to sell. After another parking lot selling
      spree, Mrs. Seeley realized the children were serious about raising money
      for missions and provided craft supplies to help them. The children
      decided they wanted to use their money to build a church in Papua New
      Guinea.
         Mrs. Seeley had contacted a missionary in Papua New Guinea who
      knew of a group of believers who had no church. The missionary emailed
      pictures of "their" project to encourage the children toward their goal.
         When school closed for the summer, the children had raised $123
      toward their goal. And when school resumed in September, the children
      were eager to continue their fund-raising. Some picked blueberries and
      donated proceeds; a home-schooled child painted rocks and sold them.
         And the school sponsored a yard sale with earnings going to the church
       in Papua New Guinea. Primary children priced donations for the sale and
       helped at various tables during the sale. When the sales were tallied, the
       children had earned more than one thousand dollars in a single day. Their
       total earnings came to more than one thousand six hundred dollars,
                                                                  enough to build
                                                                  the church and
                                                                  provide a few
                                                                  extras, such as
                                                                  hand-cranked
                                                                  tape recorders,
                                                                  so the illiterate
                                                                  villagers can lis-
                                                                  ten to the Bible.




legiaSome of Mrs. Seeley's school children with their offerings. Charlotte
   Ishkanian is editor of Mission.


          uced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Persotiallaries Dept.
       Email:gomission@gc.adventist.org
                                                                                    )91111
           LESSON            4      *October 16-22


      Nebuchadnezzar's
       Judgment



       SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 4.
Memory Text: "Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and
      honor the King of heaven, all of whose works are truth, and His ways
      justice. And those who walk in pride He is able to abase" (Daniel 4:37,
      NKJV).

              arry Truman was the caretaker of a recreation lodge on Spirit

      H       Lake, five miles north of Mount St. Helens' smoke-enshrouded
              peak in Washington State, U.S.A. Harry had been warned by
      rangers and neighbors that the mountain was going to explode. Warnings
      blared from loudspeakers on patrol cars and helicopters and blinked from
      battery-powered signs at every major crossroad. Radio and television
      announcers pleaded with their audiences to flee. Harry Truman ignored
      them all. He grinned on national television and said, "Nobody knows more
      about this mountain than Harry, and it don't dare blow up on him." On
      May 18, 1980, at 8:31 A.M., the mountain exploded, flattening everything
      for 150 square miles, including Harry, his cabin, and his cats.
        Harry was warned but not forced. In a sense, it's the same with God and
      us: We're warned but not forced, even if those warnings can sometimes be
      very forceful. This week we'll take a look at one instance in which the
      Lord worked in a powerful way to get someone's attention.

The Week at a Glance: What was King Nebuchadnezzar's
      fundamental problem? What parallels exist between this chapter and
      Daniel 2?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, October 23.
30
                 SUNDAY             October 17


     A Royal Testimony (Dan. 4:1-9).
       This chapter contains the remarkable testimony of King
     Nebuchadnezzar, the reigning monarch of the world, who now humbled
     himself before the King of the universe and acknowledged his depend-
     ence upon the Lord, "the Most High," the One who "rules in the king-
     dom of men, and gives it to whomever He chooses" (Dan. 4:25, NKJV).
     Over the course of his long reign (605-562 B.c.) he had learned that the
     Hebrew God is a revealer of secrets (Dan. 2:28) and that He saves His
     faithful followers from the fiery furnace (Dan. 3:27, 29). Yet, his heart
     remained proud and independent. God, therefore, removed him from
     his throne and humbled him into the dust. After the recovery from his
     sickness, he submitted fully to God. The "once proud monarch had
     become a humble child of God."—Ellen G. White, Prophets and Kings,
     p. 521.

Read carefully the king's words in Daniel 4:3, where he talks about
      God's kingdom as an "everlasting kingdom." Contrast those words
      with what happened in Daniel 3 and with Daniel's interpretation of
      the dream in chapter 2 (vs. 44). What did the king seem finally to
      learn about humankind's futile attempts at immortality apart from
      God?




         From the earliest times of the great controversy, when Satan first tried
      to be God (Isa. 14:12-14), up through the rise of the man of sin (2 Thess.
      2:3, 4), and until the final crisis over worship (Rev. 14:9-11), humankind
      in one way or another, has wanted to be God. This trait was seen in
      Nebuchadnezzar, as well.

Go back through everything we've read about Nebuchadnezzar so far.
      In what ways was he trying to be God or, at least, playing the role of
      God?




       You don't need to be a proud, powerful monarch in order to fall
       into this trap of trying to be God. In what ways, often very subtle,
       can anyone, rich or poor, weak or powerful, be tempted to play
       God? Why is falling broken before the Cross the only sure remedy
       against this dangerous spiritual trap?

                                                                              31
                MONDAY October 18


     Nebuchadnezzar's Second Dream (Dan. 4:10-18).
        Nebuchadnezzar's second dream was not about an image but about a
     tree. This tree was so tall that it seemed to reach into heaven and could be
     seen from any part of the globe. Its immense size and spreading branches
     displayed its powerful influence.

Read Daniel 4:10-17. What was the dream about? What sequence of
     events happened in the dream? And what does the dream itself say
     about the purpose of the dream?


        "The tree symbolism was not strange to Nebuchadnezzar. Herodotus
     tells of the case of Astyages, Nebuchadnezzar's brother-in-law, who had
     also dreamed of a tree symbolizing his dominion over part of the world.
     Nebuchadnemr himself, in an inscription, compares Babylon to a great
     tree sheltering the nations of the world." Quoted by J. Doukhan, in
     Secrets of Daniel (Hagerstown, Md.: Review and Herald, 2000), p. 63.
        In Daniel 4 the reign of Nebuchadnemr is symbolized by the tree in
     the midst of the earth (vs. 22), highlighting its importance. Babylon was
     approximately in the center of the then known world.
        The king then sees "a watcher, a holy one, coming down from heaven"
     (vs. 13, NK110. Throughout history God has been the Holy "Watcher"
     who cares for His people. The prophet Hanani reminded King Asa that
     "the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show
     Himself strong on behalf of those whose heart is loyal to Him" (2 Chron.
     16:9, NKJV). Nebuchadnezzar recognized that the Holy Watcher was
     "similar in appearance to the One who walked with the three Hebrews in
     the fiery furnace."—Ellen G. White, in Review and Herald, Feb. 1, 1881.
        The stump and the band refer to Nebuchadnezzar's preservation,
     despite his humiliation. He was to be restored as king after he came to
     know God. During his madness, he also may have been bound with a
     bronze chain to restrict his movements. There is some evidence for a
     Mesopotamian custom of putting metal bands on trees, whether to pre-
     vent them from cracking or for some other reason that is not clear.
     Remnants of a tree with bronze rings or bands were unearthed at
     Khorsabad, at the entrance to the temple of [the sun god] Shamash. (See
     J. J. Collins, Daniel [Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1993], p. 226.)

      Read Daniel 4:17. What do you understand those words spoken to
      the king to mean? Why must the "living" know these things? What
      comfort does knowing these things give you? At the same time,
      what difficult questions does this knowledge raise?




32
                TUESDAY October 19


     Daniel's Advice (Dan. 4:19-27).
Compare Daniel 2 with Daniel 4:1-9. What are the parallels between
      the two events?


        Though they share much in common, a few crucial differences exist
      between the two stories. One of the most striking is that, in Daniel 4, the
      king doesn't threaten anyone with death. Though he has a long way to go
      spiritually, perhaps what we see here is a bit of the sanctifying process of
      God working on him. He no longer wants to kill those who don't satisfy
      his every whim.

How did the dream affect Daniel, and why was he so reluctant to speak?
      Dan. 4:19.


         Daniel was troubled because of the gravity of the situation. How do
      you tell the king that he will become insane for seven years? Yet, he had
      to tell him the truth, whatever the consequences. The counsel that Daniel
      eventually gave indicates that the king could still avoid the threatened
      judgment. God intended the king to learn a certain lesson from this
      dream; or, if not from that, from the experience it forecast. Then, when
      the lesson was learned, his kingdom would be restored to him.

What was it God wanted the king to understand? Dan. 4:25. Why would
      the Lord want him to know this?


         God's rulership was the lesson God had been seeking to teach the king
      from the beginning. Some thirty years earlier Daniel had told the king,
      " 'the God of heaven has given you a kingdom"' (Dan. 2:37, 38, NKII9,
      but Nebuchadnemr had set up an image of gold to declare his in-
      dependence from the Most High. In other words, he had refused to accept
      God's sovereignty. Now he was given another opportunity to learn this
      lesson, but again he failed.

       The king was someone given great privileges yet who flouted those
       privileges, someone whom the Lord had touched in a miraculous
       way and yet who still continued to defy Him. And yet, in all this,
       God wasn't going to give up on the king (see Dan. 4:27). What does
       this tell us about our God (Exod. 34:6; 2 Pet. 3:9, 15)? What hope
       does this offer to you, who in your own sphere might be guilty of
       the same thing as Nebuchadnezzar?



                                                                               33
          WEDNESDAY October 20


      The King's Humiliation (Dan. 4:28-33).
Why did God punish Nebuchadnezzar when he exclaimed, " 'Is not this
     the great Babylon I have built?' " (After all, it was true that he had
     built large parts of the city.) Dan. 4:30, NIV.




         Babylon covered an area of approximately two square miles. The total
      length of its inner and outer walls was about thirteen miles long; the dou-
      ble wall fortifying the city measured more than ninety-six feet in width.
      (See The SDA Bible Commentary, vol. 4, p. 795.) It was a religious cen-
      ter without rival. "A cuneiform tablet of Nebuchadnezzar's time lists 53
      temples dedicated to important gods, 955 smaller sanctuaries, and 384
      street altars—all of them within the city confines."—Page 797. The cen-
      ter of Babylon's glory was the famous temple tower Etemenanki, dedi-
      cated to the god Marduk, which was 300 feet square at the base and more
      than three hundred feet high. In ancient times it was only surpassed by the
      two great pyramids at Giza in Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar's reputation as a
      builder has been preserved in the writings of the Babylonian priest
      Berossus. (See Josephus, Against Apion, 1.19.)

        As soon as the boastful words," 'Is not this the great Babylon I have
      built' " (N1V), had left the monarch's lips, judgment was meted out,
      and he became insane. What do we know about the sickness with
      which Nebuchadnezzar was afflicted?


         Nebuchadnezzar possibly suffered from a form of insanity in which a
      man thinks that he is an animal. It could have been lycanthropy, which is
      the wolf-man syndrome, or boanthropy, in which a person thinks he/she
      is an ox. A Babylonian cuneiform text, published in 1975, may refer to
      Nebuchadne77ar's madness. The text states that the king gave contradic-
      tory orders, refused to accept counsel, showed love neither to son nor
      daughter, neglected his family, and no longer performed his duties as head
      of state. (See Siegfried H. Horn, in Ministry, April 1978, p. 40.)

       Read carefully verses 28-33 of Daniel 4. The exact thing that
       Nebuchadnezzar boasted about was the exact thing that he lost.
       What spiritual principle is seen here? What lessons can we, on a
       smaller scale, learn from this incident? Contrast what happened
       here with the story of the rich young ruler (Matt. 19:16-23). What
       differences do you see here in how the Lord dealt with these two
       people?

34
             THURSDAY October 21


     Nebuchadnezzar's Conversion (Dan. 4:34-37).
       Royal conversions are unusual but not unknown. King Agbar of Edessa
     in Mesopotamia, it is said, became a Christian when the gospel was
     preached to him.

What were the important points of Nebuchadnezzar's "sermon" after
     God restored him to his throne? Dan. 4:34, 35, 37.


        The return of reason is said to have come to the king with his recogni-
     tion of the true God. "The once proud monarch had become a humble
     child of God; the tyrannical, overbearing ruler, a wise and compassionate
     king. He who had defied and blasphemed the God of heaven, now
     acknowledged the power of the Most High and earnestly sought to pro-
     mote the fear of Jehovah and the happiness of his subjects. Under the
     rebuke of Him who is King of kings and Lord of lords, Nebuchadnezzar
     had learned at last the lesson which all rulers need to learn—that true
     greatness consists in true goodness. . . .
        "God's purpose that the greatest kingdom in the world should show
     forth His praise was now fulfilled. This public proclamation, in which
     Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged the mercy and goodness and authority of
     God, was the last act of his life recorded in sacred history."—Ellen G.
     White, Prophets and Kings, p. 521.

How does Nebuchadnezzar's hymn of praise indicate that he had ex-
      perienced a true conversion? Dan. 4:34-37.


        There are a number of indicators to show that this conversion was gen-
      uine. (1) His desire to give God publicly the glory at the expense of his
      own humiliation shows that the once proud monarch no longer thought
      himself to be the greatest king on earth. (2) In chapter 3 he had defied the
      God of the Jews; now he acknowledged Him as the true God of heaven
      who held the king's destiny in His hand. (3) His selfishness and self-
      glorification gave way to concern for the glory of God.
        True repentance and sorrow for sin denote that inward change of
      mind, affections, convictions, and commitment that leads to the outward
      turning from sin to God and His service.

       Notice carefully the language of Daniel 4:34-37. See the sense of
       the king's utter dependence upon God. Why is that attitude so
       crucial for anyone who seeks to serve the Lord? How does the
       Cross help us understand our total dependence upon God, espe-
       cially for salvation?


                                                                              35
                   FRIDAY October 22

Further Study: Read the chapter entitled "True Greatness" in Ellen
      G. White's Prophets and Kings, pp. 514-521.

        "King Nebuchadnezzar, before whom Daniel so often honored the
      name of God, was finally thoroughly converted, and learned to 'praise and
      extol and honour the King of heaven.' "—Ellen G. White Comments, The
      SDA Bible Commentary, vol. 4, p. 1170.
        "God's judgments against men may be averted by repentance and con-
      version (see Isa. 38:1, 2, 5; Jet 18:7-10; Jon. 3:1-10). For this reason
      God announced the impending judgment upon Nebuchadne77ar but gave
      him a full year in which to repent, and thus avert the threatened calamity
      (see Dan. 4:29). However, the king did not change his way of life, and
      accordingly brought upon himself the execution of the judgment. . . . God
      forewarns peoples and nations of their impending doom. He sends a mes-
      sage to the world today, warning of its rapidly approaching end. Few may
      heed such warnings, but because adequate warning has been given them
      men will be without excuse in the day of calamity."—The SDA Bible
      Commentary, vol. 4, p. 792.

Discussion Questions:
          In the eyes of humankind, Nebuchadnezzar was one of the
       greatest kings in the ancient world; but in the eyes of God, what
       really constitutes greatness?

       © Conversion is the work of the Holy Spirit on the hearts of indi-
       viduals. Is there anything we can do to help a person who is
       under conviction to yield to God's Spirit?

       ©A theme seen in this chapter, as well as in some preceding it, is
       the sovereignty of God. Why is this such an important topic to
       understand? What role does the Sabbath play in helping us
       understand this crucial truth?

Summary: The experience of Nebuchadnezzar in this chapter is an illus-
      tration of the truth of Proverbs 29:23, "A man's pride will bring him low"
      (NKJIO. Yet, his public confession and his desire to give God the glory
      indicate that he had a true conversion experience.




36
                              INSIDES
                                     tO/T

My Father Knows, Part 1
Homer Trecartin
   No! Michelle silently pleaded. You can't want to be baptized! The color
drained from Michelle's cheeks, and tears formed in her eyes. What could
she say to this young girl?
   Sixteen-year-old Anna had matured so much in the three years since her
mother had been—Michelle couldn't bring herself to form the word—
since her mother had died. Anna had her mother's fine features and that
same peaceful, determined look that her mother, Sofia, had shown when
she told Michelle she wanted to give her life to Jesus.
   Anna and her brother, Hans, had been attending Michelle's "English"
classes for children. It was more like a Vacation Bible School, and forty or
fifty children had come each week. They came from all backgrounds, and
they enjoyed the singing and stories she shared with them.
   When Anna and Hans didn't show up for two weeks, Michelle began to
worry. Her translator seemed hesitant to share with her why the children
weren't coming. Finally Michelle got impatient and said she would go to
the home and talk with the parents herself.
   A lovely woman met Michelle and her translator at the door. The woman
introduced herself as Sofia and invited them in. Michelle noticed a Bible
in the book shelf, and her hopes soared that Sofia was a Christian. But
when Sofia excused herself and left the room, Michelle could hear angry
voices in a heated argument.
   Sofia seemed pale when she returned to the room with tea. Michelle
realized her visit was awkward and not well planned. She had not asked
her husband to go with her, and it had further alienated Sofia's Muslim
husband.
   Michelle told Sofia that she enjoyed having Hans and Anna at the
"classes" and hoped they could return. Sofia made no promises, but the
 next week the children were at the meeting when the program began.
   Several months passed, and Michelle felt her friendship with Sofia
deepening. Sofia began attending the classes with her children. Then one
 day Sofia confided, "Michelle, I love Jesus. I want to give my heart to
 Him. I want to carry my Bible openly, not wrapped up in garbage paper. I
 want people to know I love Jesus!"
   Tears of happiness filled Michelle's eyes as she hugged Sofia. She had
 made mistakes, but God had won the victory. But Michelle's happiness
 was short lived.
                                                     (continued next week)

Homer Trecartin is Secretary-Treasurer of the Middle East Union in Nicosia, Cyprus. This
story took place in an undiceloced, predominantly Muslim country. All names have been
changed.

Produced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Personal 1411111=1.11111
Email:gomission@gc.adventist.org
           LESSON             5       *October 23-29



       Surprise Party




       SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 5.
Memory Text: "Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and lean not
       on your own understanding; in all your ways acknowledge Him, and
       He shall direct your paths" (Proverbs 3:5, 6, NKIV).

              s this chapter opens, we see a great banquet hall with a thousand

      A       guests. The "thousand" is no exaggeration. Kings in the ancient
              world were known for their lavish banquets.
         Throughout the chapter, Nebuchadnezzar is called the father of
      Belshazzar (Dan. 5:2, 11, 13, 18, 22), referring to the fact that his mother,
      Nitocris, was probably Nebuchadne77ar's daughter. The word father in
      the Semitic languages can refer to any ancestor or predecessor, not only
      to the immediate parent. Mephibosheth is called the son of Saul (2 Sam.
      19:24), whereas he was really the son of Jonathan (2 Sam. 9:6). Christ
      was called the Son of David (Matt. 9:27), not because David was His
      immediate human father but because He was from the lineage of David
      (Luke 2:4).

The Week at a Glance: What was the king's sin? Why did
      he react as he did to the handwriting on the wall? Why was the king
      "without excuse" for his actions? In what sense are we all, as Romans
      1:20 says, "without excuse"?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, October 30.

38
                  SUNDAY October 24


      The Handwriting on the Wall (Dan. 5:1-9).
        When in 539 a.c. Cyrus, the Persian king, marched against Babylon,
      King Nabonidus, of Babylon, met him with his forces at Opis, on the
      Tigris, in an attempt to prevent Cyrus from crossing the river. The
      Babylonians suffered a disastrous defeat, and the Persians pushed im-
      mediately through to Sippar, on the Euphrates. Cyrus captured Sippar
      without a fight in October of 539 B.C. According to the Babylonian
      chronicle, Nabonidus fled south. Belshazzar, his son, stayed in Babylon,
      about thirty-five miles south of Sippar, trusting in its strong fortifications.

        Surrounded by the enemy, why would Belshazzar give such a ban-
      quet and send for the vessels from God's temple (Dan. 5:1-4)?


        Was it an act of defiance aimed at the Persians and a show of confi-
      dence in the strong walls of Babylon? Or was it simply a festival that hap-
      pened to fall on this particular date? Whatever the reason, Belshazzar's
      pride and reckless state of mind are shown by his command to bring the
      vessels from the house of Yahweh.

Read verse 4. Though they were praising the gods of the vessels, how was
      this an act of defiance against the God of the temple from which
      those vessels were taken? See Exod. 20:4, 5; Isa. 45:5; Col. 1:15;
      1 Tim. 1:17.


         No matter how drunk the king and his guests were, they quickly
      sobered up when they saw the "fingers of a man's hand" writing some-
      thing on the wall. All of a sudden, the revelry stopped, and a deathly
      silence filled the room.

What was the king's first reaction when he recovered from the initial
      shock? Dan. 5:7.


        Belsha77ar calls for an interpretation, but once again, as in the case of
      his grandfather, the wise men of Babylon are unable to help the king. The
      inscription was in Aramaic, which, like Hebrew, is written only in conso-
      nants, and it was so short that though they could read the individual
      words, they did not understand their meaning.

        Look at the reaction of the king to the writing that he didn't under-
        stand (vs. 6). Without even knowing what the words meant, he was
        afraid. What does that reaction imply?


                                                                                  39
                 MONDAY October 25


      The Queen's Counsel (Dan. 5:10-12).
        The confusion of Belsha77ar and his nobles must have lasted for some
     time. The news of what had happened was carried throughout the palace
     and reached the ears of the "queen," who had not been present in the ban-
     quet hall. Her identity is uncertain. It was not one of Belshazzar's wives,
     because they and his concubines were already at the feast (vs. 3). Scholars
     are divided as to whether it was Belshazzar's mother or his grandmother,
     the wife of Nebuchadnezzar.
        The importance of queen mothers is widely attested to in ancient Near
     Eastern sources. Often the mother of the reigning king held a more
     important position at the court of her son than his own wife. An inscrip-
     tion from Haran speaks of the influence Belshazzar's mother had on the
     career of her son, and the Greek historian Herodotus reports that
     Nebuchadnuzar's wife was renowned for her wisdom. He credits her
     with the development of the defenses of Babylon.

        The king called in all the wise men but Daniel. What does this
      omission imply about how far removed the king was from the past
      and the spiritual lessons that he should have learned?


        When the queen mother entered the banquet hall, she was able to calm
      the frazzled king. She remembered that on at least two prior occasions
      Daniel had been able to interpret Nebuchadne7.72r's dreams, and she must
      have concluded that if anyone could solve this riddle, it would be Daniel.
      He evidently was in retirement at that time, though he still lived in
      Babylon. At the right time, God had the right man ready.

What reasons did the queen give for her confidence that Daniel could
     decipher the handwriting on the wall? Dan. 5:11, 12.


        Before urging her son to call Daniel, the queen mother sang the praises
     of the aged prophet. Her words remind us of Nebuchadnemr's confes-
     sion in Daniel chapter 4. The fact that she mentions the name of Daniel
     twice indicates that she was well acquainted with him. If she was
     Nebuchadnemr's widow, it is possible that she shared her husband's
     conviction regarding Daniel's God.

       What lesson do her words about Daniel suggest regarding the
       power of personal influence? Be honest with yourself: What kind
       of influence do your words project upon those with whom you
       come in contact? What do you need to change?



40
                TUESDAY October 26


     Without Excuse (Dan. 5:13-24).
       From the way Belsha772r greeted Daniel, we may conclude that
     Belsha772r was not personally acquainted with Daniel, or he had not seen
     him for many years. It seems that when Nebuchadnezzar died more than
     twenty years earlier, Daniel retired from public service. However, the fact
     that Daniel, in his old age, entered the services of the Persian kings (Dan.
     6:1-3) indicates that his retirement from Babylonian politics was not a
     result of ill health or old age. His public censure of Belsha772r (Dan.
     5:22, 23) may have been one of the factors that led Darius to hire the serv-
     ices of Daniel.

Why could Belshazzar offer Daniel only the third place in the kingdom
      (Dan. 5:16)?


         Officially, Belsha77ar's father, Nabonidus, was still the king of
      Babylon. Belshazzar, as coregent, was second in command; therefore, he
      could offer only the third place to the person who could interpret the writ-
      ing on the wall.
         As we see later, Daniel had no difficulty interpreting the words; but
      before he did so, he wanted the king to know the reason for the impend-
      ing tragedy. By recounting the history of Nebuchadne77ar, Daniel
      reminded King Belsha77ar that it was the Most High God who had
      granted Nebuchadnezzar, and by implication also Belshazzar, the author-
      ity to rule Babylon (Dan. 5:18, 23). He pointed out that at the end of
      Nebuchadnezzar's insanity, the king acknowledged that " 'the Most High
      God rules in the kingdom of men, and appoints over it whomever He
      chooses' " (vs. 21, NKTO.

What was Belshazzar's great sin in the sight of God? Dan 5:22, 23.

        Although Belsha77ar knew firsthand what had happened to his grand-
      father Nebuchadne772r, he failed to learn from Nebuchadnemes ex-
      perience. His grandfather had been proud, but he had repented and had
      become a child of God. Belsha77ar, on the other hand, chose to defy
      God's law and authority and refused to humble himself. His sin, therefore,
      was great and the judgment speedy.

       In a sense, Daniel was telling the king that he was "without excuse"
       (Rom. 1:20). Why, in the end, are we all "without excuse"? Even
       more important, why does the fact we are "without excuse" make
       the Cross even more crucial to us?



                                                                               41
         WEDNESDAY October 27


      Weighed and Found Wanting (Dan. 5:25-29).
What was the message of the handwriting on the wall? Dan. 5:26-28.


        In Aramaic, the inscription consisted of a series of four words. Because
     Aramaic, like Hebrew, was written only with consonants, the way in
     which the words were to be read depended on which vowels were sup-
     plied. To the wise men, the letters MNMNTQLPRSN did not make
     sense. Some of them may have seen the names of three common weights
     on the wall, "a mina, a mina, a shekel, and a half-shekel," but translated
     into modern weights, what did "a pound, a pound, an ounce, and half an
     ounce" mean? Daniel read them out as "mene, mene, tekel, upharsin"
     and then gave the interpretation: "numbered, numbered, weighed, and
     divided." The repetition of the first word is a solemn emphasis, just like
     Jesus' words "verily, verily" in the New Testament (John 3:11, 5:24).
        MENE means "numbered," because the days of Belshazzar's reign had
     been numbered, and God had decided to call a halt. TEKEL means
     "weighed." Belshazzar's life and actions were placed on one side of the
     scales, so to speak, and God's law on the other side. Belshazzar's side,
     unfortunately, was found wanting. PERES means "broken" or "divided."
     Belshazzar's kingdom was about to be broken and given to the Medes and
     Persians. There is a play on words here, because the consonants for the
     word divided are the same as for the name Persian (paras).
        The message, then, was clear and specific. God had numbered or
     added up the crimes of the king and completed their tally. The period of
     Babylon's political supremacy was coming to an end. Besides the dreams
     of Nebuchadnezzar and the deliverance of the three Hebrews from the
     fiery furnace, the mysterious handwriting on the wall was another exam-
     ple of God's direct intervention in human affairs.

       If our lives, like Belshazzar's, were placed on a balance (our life on
       one side and God's law on the other), would we fare much better?
       And even if we fared better, would we fare well enough? After all,
       whose life—even that of the most saintly Christian—can stand
       before God's holy law (Rom. 3:23)? In that sense, we aren't all that
       different, really, from Belshazzar. However, we believe that there is
       a crucial and defining difference between us as Christians and this
       king: our faith in the God in "whose hand thy breath is" (Dan.
       5:23). Read the following texts: Psalm 130:4, John 5:24, Romans
       8:1, Ephesians 1:7. How do they explain what we have in Christ
       that makes all the difference between us and this king, who was
       doomed now and forever?




42
             THURSDAY October 28


      Babylon's Fall (Dan. 5:30, 31).
         While at times God delayed judgment to give people the opportunity
      to repent (Jonah 1), in Belshazzar's case the time of probation was closed.
         How the Persians were able to penetrate the seemingly impregnable
      defenses of the city is explained by the Greek historian Herodotus, who
      wrote some eighty years after the event happened. He writes that Cyrus
      diverted the river Euphrates by redirecting its flow, causing the river
      level to drop as it went beneath the city wall. When the water reached
      about midway up a man's thigh, the Persian soldiers entered the city via
      the riverbed. So sure the city could not be taken, the Babylonians grew
      careless. Thus, the Persians came upon them by surprise and so took the
      city.—Herodotus, The Histories (Baltimore, Md.: Penguin Books,
      1954), pp. 90, 91.
         From the Babylonian chronicles we learn that Babylon fell on the six-
      teenth day of Tishri, or on October 12, 539 B.c., in terms of our calendar.
      Belshazzar was slain, but his father, Nabonidus, who had fled south, sur-
      rendered and committed himself to the mercy of Cyrus. According to a
      Greek report, Cyrus spared his life and gave him a residence in
      Carmania, a Persian province located along the north shore of the Persian
      Gulf.

What are some parallels between the fall of literal Babylon in 539 B.C.
      and the fall of spiritual Babylon in the time of the end? Jer. 51:8,
      51:13, 51:45, 51:60-64; Rev. 14:8; 17:1; 18:4, 18:21-24.




       Around 597 B.C., when Babylon was at the pinnacle of its power,
       Jeremiah prophesied that Babylon would become " 'a heap, a
       dwelling place for jackals, an astonishment and a hissing, without
       an inhabitant" (Jer 51:37, NICJV). Yet, after its fall to the Persians,
       it remained an important city. Alexander the Great planned to
       make it the capital of his empire, but he died prematurely. One of
       his generals, Seleucus Nicator, chose Opis, to the north, as his capi-
       tal, which he named Seleucia after himself. He used millions of
       bricks from Babylon to help build his new capital. Babylon, there-
       fore, sank slowly into obscurity. As century succeeded century, it
       gradually fell into decay. By A.D. 200 the place was deserted.
       Covered by the shifting sands of the desert, it became a lost city
       until archaeologists uncovered it in the nineteenth century.


                                                                              43
                    FRIDAY October 29

Further Study: Read Ellen G. White, Prophets and Kings, pp. 522-
      538.

         "Belsha77nr had been given many opportunities for knowing and doing
      the will of God. He had seen his grandfather Nebuchadnezzar banished
      from the society of men. He had seen the intellect in which the proud
      monarch gloried taken away by the One who gave it. He had seen the king
      driven from his kingdom, and made the companion of the beasts of the
      field. But Belshazzar's love of amusement and self-glorification effaced
      the lessons he should never have forgotten; and he committed sins simi-
      lar to those that brought signal judgments on Nebuchadnezzar. He wasted
      the opportunities graciously granted him, neglecting to use the opportu-
      nities within his reach for becoming acquainted with truth. 'What must I
      do to be saved?' was a question that the great but foolish king passed by
      indifferently."—Ellen G. White, Bible Echo, April 25, 1898.

Discussion Questions:
       O Belshazzar was acquainted with many of God's actions; yet,
       he deliberately chose to ignore them. Why do we all tend to do
       the same thing; that is, ignore what God has done in our life or
       in the lives of others? What's the main reason?

       0 What practical steps can we take when we weigh our lives in
       the balances and find that they are wanting? Why is the Cross
       the first place we must go if we want to change?

       O What is the relevance of this chapter to the second angel's
       message, in Revelation 14:8?

       O In Daniel 5:23, Daniel tells the king that he has ignored the
       God "in whose hand thy breath is." What does that statement
       mean? How does it fit in with the overall context of the previous
       chapters?

Summary: In spite of the experiences of his grandfather Nebuchadne772r,
      with which Belshazzar was acquainted, the king chose to defy the God of
      heaven and suffered the consequences. It is a sad commentary on the fact
      that the wisdom of parents and grandparents cannot always be passed on
      to the next generations. The individual's eternal destiny rests on his or her
      own choice.




44
                               INSID E tary


My Father Knows, Part 2
Homer Trecartin

   Michelle was still rejoicing over the news that her friend Sofia wanted
to follow Christ when neighbors came to tell Michelle that Sofia was in a
coma. Michelle rushed to the hospital and found Sofia lying unconscious.
Bruises and wounds covered her body.
   Michelle wanted to run from the room. What had she done to her friend
by sharing Christ? How could her husband do this to her? Michelle took
Sofia's hand and began to pray. As she prayed, she felt Sofia's hand tighten
in hers.
   Sofia came out of the coma briefly when her brother visited. She begged
him to give his life to God; then she slipped back into the coma and died.
   Michelle was numb with grief and guilt. She agonized over what she
could have done differently to prevent this senseless murder. During the
week of mourning, Michelle visited Sofia's home and sat with the women
every day. She did it for Hans and Anna, to let them know she cared. But
her presence had an impact on others, as well. Even Sofia's husband
seemed to soften.
   One day Sofia's husband came to ask Michelle's forgiveness for what he
had done to Sofia. Michelle nodded, but in her heart a battle waged. How
could she really forgive a man who had murdered his wife, the mother of
 his children, her friend?
   Two years later he again visited Michelle. He wanted to remarry and
 wanted her advice. Michelle listened in stunned silence to this man's
 description of the woman he now loved. Michelle encouraged him to
 marry the woman.
    Hans and Anna seemed to adapt well to their new mother. Then, with-
 out warning, Anna came to Michelle and asked to be baptized. Images of
 a bruised and beaten Sofia flooded Michelle's mind.
   "No!" she whispered fiercely. "Anna, don't you remember what hap-
 pened to your mother?"
   "Yes," Anna said, "but I want to be baptized."
    "But Anna," Michelle protested, "you must ask your father."
    "My father knows," Anna replied, "and he is happy for me. He wants me
 to follow my conscience."
    Tears of joy streamed down Michelle's cheeks as she hugged Anna
 tightly. She prayed for the girl, for her father, and for those whose lives
 will be touched by Anna's decision to follow Jesus.

Homer Trecartin is Secretary-Treasurer of the Middle East Union in Nicosia, Cyprus. This
story took place in an undisclosed, predominantly Muslim country. All names have been
changed.


Produced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Personal Ministries Dept.      _
Email:gomission@gc.adyentistorg
           LESSON              6        *October 30—November 5


      An Ancient
      Death Decree

     1111111111111E
      SABBATH AFTERNOON
Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 6.
Memory Text: " 'My God sent His angel and shut the lions'
      mouths, so that they have not hurt me, because I was found innocent
      before Him' " (Daniel 6:22, NKJV).

               aniel in the lions' den: If it's not the first story learned by children

      D        who have grown up in a Bible-oriented home, then it's certainly
               one of the first.
         At the same time, the issues it raises aren't so simple. After all, history
      records many examples of Christians who, standing firm like Daniel
      ("Dare to Be a Daniel," as a song goes), didn't fare so well when tossed
      into the lions' den. As we all know, even today, in a world where
      Christians still die for their faith, the endings aren't so happy, at least the
      endings we see now.
           Sure, this chapter raises a lot of questions. But that's the nature of
      truth: The more we learn, the more we realize what we need to know. This
      week, let's learn a little more and come away with a realization of how
      little we really know.

The Week at a Glance: What have we learned so far about
      the character of Daniel? What are the pitfalls of jealousy? What rea-
      sons would Daniel have had if he had chosen to pray in secret as
      opposed to doing what he had always done? What did the king learn
      about God after Daniel had been spared death? Why is forced obedi-
      ence meaningless in the sight of God?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, November 6.



46
                  SUNDAY            October 31


     Daniel, the Characteristics of a Faithful
     Servant (Dan. 6:1-4).
        "Ye shall know them by their fruits" (Matt. 7:16).

         When Babylon fell to the Medes and Persians, God's hand was over
      Daniel, and he was not killed as were Belsha77ar and his nobles. When
      the new king, Darius, put together his new government, he appointed
      Daniel as one of the three governors over the whole realm. He had obvi-
      ously heard of Daniel's exceptional wisdom and ability, and to have such
      a qualified local administrator could only help the Persians in ruling the
      conquered nation.
         Daniel exemplified in his life the type of people God had in mind when
      Ellen White wrote: "The greatest want of the world is the want of men—
      men who will not be bought or sold; men who in their inmost souls are
      true and honest, men who do not fear to call sin by its right name, men
      whose conscience is as true to duty as the needle to the pole, men who
      will stand for the right though the heavens falr—Education, p. 57.

What were some of the qualities that made Daniel stand out as a leader
      of men? Dan. 6:3, 4.




        Look up the following verses taken from previous chapters in
      Daniel. Write out what we can extract from the texts about Daniel's
      character.

      Dan. 1:8

      Dan. 2:20-23

      Dan. 2:49

      Dan. 5:11, 12

      Dan. 5:17




                                                                             47
                 MONDAY November 1


      The Plot Against Daniel (Dan. 6:5-9).
Read Daniel 6:4, 5. Does this mean Daniel was sinless? If not, why not?
      How do you interpret what was meant about his character?


         Though the text itself doesn't say why they wanted to do Daniel in,
      more than likely they were jealous of this Jew, this foreigner, who was in
      a top place in the kingdom. Indeed, if you read verse 2, Daniel clearly was
      one of the most powerful and influential people in the court; second, it
      would seem, to the king himself. It's not hard to imagine someone covet-
      ing that slot. We see here another manifestation of the first sin, Lucifer's
      in heaven, when he coveted a position that was not his.

What part of Daniel's life did the governors and satraps select as the area
      of their attack, and why? Dan. 6:5.


         Having failed to find anything in Daniel's character or professional
      activities that they could have used to discredit him before Darius, the
      governors and satraps turned to his religion. Because there was no appar-
      ent conflict between his religious life and the performance of his duties,
      they had to invent one.
         Their claim before Darius that all the governors, administrators,
      satraps, counselors, and advisors had consulted together was greatly
      exaggerated. The majority of them probably were scattered across the
      kingdom and did not even know what was going on. But their flattery
      achieved its purpose. The bait was thrown out, and the king took it.
         The decree stated no one could petition " 'any god or man for thirty
      days"' (vs. 7, NKJV). Because the issue concerned worship, the reference
      to "man" most likely refers to the Babylonian priests who were the medi-
      ators between the people and their gods. In other words, during this period
      of thirty days, only the king was to be the priest for the people. This would
      be a humbling experience for the local priests and a test of loyalty to the
      new Persian government. "The suggested mode of compelling every sub-
      ject in the former Babylonian domain to acknowledge the authority of
      Persia seemed a statesmanlike measure that would contribute to the unifi-
      cation of the Middle and Near East."—Frank E. Gaebelein, gen. ed.,
      "Daniel"—"Minor Prophets:' in The Expositor's Bible Commentary
      (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1985), vol. 7, p. 79.

       Who hasn't experienced the bonds that jealousy can wrap around
       us? Think about times when you've been trapped by this sin. Over
       what were you jealous? Why? (Doesn't it all seem so trite and triv-
       ial now?) How does death to self, at the Cross, provide the only
       escape?

48
               TUESDAY November 2


      The Matter of Prayer (Dan. 6:10-18).
        To close the shutters of his window and to pray to God in the solitude
      of his room would have been an easy way out for Daniel. After all, from
      the Sermon on the Mount we know that Jesus said: " 'When you pray, go
      into your room, and when you have shut your door, pray to your Father
      who is in the secret place— (Matt. 6:6, NKJV). Maybe it would have been
      the easy way out, but would it have been wrong? Why make trouble when
      you don't need to?

Write down any reasons why Daniel should have closed the door and not
      given his enemies any opportunity to do him harm. What biblical evi-
      dence can you find for your reasons?




Write down any reasons why Daniel should have done what he had
     always done, despite the trap he was knowingly stepping into? What
     biblical evidence can you find for your reasons?




         After Sunday legislation was passed in California, A. T. Jones urged
      Adventists to defy the laws openly; that is, to do whatever work they
      would normally do. In contrast, Ellen White specifically told Adventists
      not to defy those laws: "To defy the Sunday laws will but strengthen in
      their persecution the religious zealots who are seeking to enforce them.
      Give them no occasion to call you lawbreakers. . . . One does not receive
      the mark of the beast because he shows that he realizes the wisdom of
      keeping the peace by refraining from work that gives offense, doing at the
      same time a work of the highest importance."—Testimonies for the
      Church, vol. 9, p. 232. In fact, in another place she wrote, in the context
      of Sunday laws, that instead of openly violating the law, Seventh-day
      Adventists should hold additional worship services on Sunday, as well as
      on the true Sabbath. (See page 233.) Why do you think she took this posi-
      tion, as opposed to A. T. Jones's?

        Whatever the reasons, Daniel chose to take the more difficult
        route. Suppose, however, that instead of being delivered from the
        lions, he had been eaten up. Would Daniel still have done the right
        thing? Justify your answer.


                                                                              49
         W EDN ES D AY November 3


      Daniel in the Lions' Den (Dan. 6:19-23).
         The den of lions was probably an underground pit with perpendicular
      walls and an opening at the top. The condemned were lowered or thrown
      into it from above. In this particular case, a large stone was rolled over the
      opening and sealed with the king's signet ring and that of his nobles. The
      seal was a guarantee to Daniel's enemies that no attempt would be made
      to save him but also to the king that Daniel would not be harmed in any
      way if, as the king hoped, the God of Daniel should preserve him from
      the lions.

What does Darius's question next morning at the lions' den reveal about
      his acquaintance with Daniel's faith? Dan. 6:20. Read between the
      lines. What do those words teach us about the kind of witness that
      Daniel was for the Lord?




        What's fascinating in Daniel's reply is his statement that God spared
      him because of his "innocency." What could Daniel mean by that?
      Certainly someone as closely connected to the Lord as Daniel had to
      understand his sinfulness. Indeed, it's hard to imagine anyone who has
      ever had any kind of genuine experience with God not being made
      acutely aware of his or her own moral shortcomings and sinfulness.

Review Romans 3:9-20. What does that tell us about human nature?

         Instead, and in marked contrast to BelshaTzar (see Dan. 5:6), Daniel
      seemed to be operating out of a clear conscience; he knew that he was liv-
      ing in harmony with the Lord and that he had done nothing wrong that
      would have justified his being thrown into the pit with a bunch of raven-
      ous carnivores. In other words, Daniel wasn't secretly stealing money
      from the king's treasury or secretly planning a revolt, something that
      could have made this punishment justifiable. In that sense, his conscience
      was clear, and that enabled him, no doubt, to have some sense of peace.
      Although Daniel probably did not know the end from the beginning, his
      clear conscience must have given him some courage in this situation.

       Whatever you're doing wrong, sooner or later, it's going to come to
       light (Matt. 10:26)—you can be sure of it. Write a prayer, asking
       God to give you not only the will to discard this sin but the power
       to, as well. Repent and turn away before it comes back to haunt
       you, because you can be sure that it will.

50
             THURSDAY November 4


      Darius Honors God (Dan. 6:24-28).
        Darius was "exceedingly glad" when he discovered that Daniel had
     survived the lions' den. At the same time, he vented his anger on the men
     who had deceived him. However harsh and unjust the punishment might
     have seemed (after all, the men's wives and children were thrown into the
     pit with them), it was a common custom of despots back then to kill
     whole families, along with the condemned men. From a purely practical
     standpoint, it should have given people pause before violating the laws;
     on another level, it's a crude example of how our sins and wrongdoing
     can impact others.

Read carefully Daniel 6:25-27. What are the things about Daniel's God
      that the king acknowledges? Is he correct? Compare what the king
      says with these following texts: Psalm 59:1, 2; Acts 2:22; Galatians
      1:4; 1 Timothy 4:10; Hebrews 2:4; 10:31; James 1:17. How accurate
      of a portrayal of God did the king give?




         The king clearly had somewhat of an accurate understanding of the
      character and power of God, especially after such a manifestation of the
      Lord's power and character. At the same time, though, it was still a lim-
      ited understanding. This is seen best, perhaps, in the decree that he issued.

Read Daniel 6:26. What about the king's decree exposes his lack of
      understanding about God?


        In a sense, the Lord wants us to "tremble and fear" before Him, but
      only because of who He is, holy and pure, and who we are, unholy and
      impure, in comparison. This is something, however, that never can be
      decreed or instituted by any person or government or even a church. A
      relationship with the Lord needs to be based on our own personal
      encounter with Him, with His love, His mercy, His power in contrast to
      our sinfulness, our helplessness, and our great need of redemption. Out
      of that alone we worship Him, a point lost on the king.

       A man was studying the Bible with his young daughter. After he
       told her how much he wanted her to love the Lord, she asked,
       "Daddy, would you force me to love God if you could?" What
       would you answer, and why?



                                                                               51
                   FRIDAY November 5

Further Study: Read Ellen G. White, Prophets and Kings, pp. 539-548.
         "Daniel, the prime minister of the greatest of earthly kingdoms, was at
      the same time a prophet of God, receiving the light of heavenly inspira-
      tion. A man of like passions as ourselves, the pen of inspiration describes
      him as without fault. His business transactions, when subjected to the
      closest scrutiny of his enemies, were found to be without one flaw. He
      was an example of what every businessman may become when his heart
      is converted and consecrated, and when his motives are right in the sight
      of God."—Ellen G. White, Conflict and Courage, p. 254.
         "From the story of Daniel's deliverance we may learn that in seasons
      of trial and gloom God's children should be just what they were when
      their prospects were bright with hope and their surroundings all that they
      could desire. Daniel in the lions' den was the same Daniel who stood
      before the king as chief among the ministers of state and as a prophet of
      the Most High. A man whose heart is stayed upon God will be the same
      in the hour of his greatest trial as he is in prosperity, when the light and
      favor of God and of man beam upon him. Faith reaches to the unseen,
      and grasps eternal realities."—Ellen G. White, Prophets and Kings,
      p. 545.

Discussion Questions:
       O What parallels can be drawn between Christ's life and
       Daniel's life? What are the differences?

       • What is the relationship between a person's devotional life
       and the ability to meet tests of faith? Is it simply a matter of how
       much time one spends in study and prayer?

       © Read over the last line in the second Ellen G. White quote
       above. What is she talking about? Rephrase in your own words
       what she said. How can you make this idea practical in your life?

Summary: From Daniel's experience in the lions' den, we learn that
     those who will inherit the kingdom of God are not necessarily the
     strongest physically or the brightest intellectually. Rather, they will be
     those who have fully surrendered to the Lord and committed their lives
     to Him, regardless of the consequences.




52
                            INSIDE
                                                              tory
Modern-day Waldenses
J. H. Zachary
   During the thirteenth to nineteenth centuries, young believers, called
Waldenses, suffered religious persecution and were forced to flee to the
safety of mountain homes. But they did not stay there; they left their
mountain homes to scatter religious literature across Europe. When they
found interested persons, they pulled hidden portions of scripture from
their garments to share with the families they met.
   Today the Waldensian history is repeating itself in Southeast Asia,
where the church is sending out young people to share the gospel in un-
entered areas within their territory. Trained as literature evangelists and
equipped with the skills of personal evangelism, the youth go out two by
two to visit communities that have for years resisted the gospel. They earn
their living selling literature, and the church provides for their housing.
   Sam and a friend volunteered to serve for a year in this program and
were assigned to a village that had once had a small Adventist congrega-
tion. Their task was to reopen the Adventist church that had been closed
for months. They found the churchyard overgrown with weeds and bushes
and spent several days clearing the yard so the church would be visible.
   They began visiting villagers, but they were met with hostility. They
could not find the backslidden members, and others did not welcome
them. Discouraged, they prayed for God to open a way for them.
    It was the rice harvest season, and every able-bodied family member
was working in the rice paddies. Sam and his companion volunteered to
help with the harvest. At first, families hesitated to let them help, but with
sickles in hand, the boys began to cut the rice. They joined in the fellow-
ship of working and eating together. They continued working until the
 fields were harvested. Grateful families gave them generous gifts of rice.
    After the harvest when the boys returned to selling literature and con-
                             tacting former members, the people of the com-
                             munity welcomed them into their homes and
                             bought their health books. In time former mem-
                             bers joined the young men for Bible studies, and
                             small groups formed. Before their year was over,
                             the boys were worshiping with a group of 25
                             Sabbath keepers.
                                Sam rejoiced to see God at work in his life. He
                             has signed up again for his fifth year of service
                             as a Waldensian volunteer.

                             J. H. Zachary (left) was coordinator of international evan-
                             gelism for The Quiet Hour.


Produced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Personal Ministries Dept. _
Email:gomission@gc.adventist.org                                                )3
             BE READY!
    In 1992 the trustees of the Ellen G. White Estate, in co-
operation with Pacific Press Publishing Association, released a
new compilation of Ellen White statements about the end
times entitled Last Day Events. This best-selling volume takes
statements from previously published books, manuscript collec-
tions, and material never before published.
    Read about "God's Last Day Church," "Country Living,"
"The Little Time of Trouble," "The Shaking," "The Close of
Probation," and more in this essential work from the writings
of Ellen G. White.
Blue hardcover binding:
0-8163-1879-4.
US$14.99, Can$22.49.
Also available in a special
paperback edition in English,
Spanish, and French!
US$5.99, Can$8.99 each.
English paperback:
0-8163-1901-4.
Spanish paperback:
0-8163-9795-3.
French paperback:
43330-02845.




Pacific Press®
Where the Word is Life.
© 2004 * Prices subject to change. 169/45590


           Available at your local ABC, 1-800-765-6955.
           Or read a sample chapter first and order online:
         p www.AdventistBookCenter.com
       Make
      a Dream
     Come Due
The Ukrainian Adventist Institute of Arts and Sciences
   was just a dream seven years ago. But today it is a
thriving institution near Kiev, Ukraine, serving more than
 400 students. Lives of students and faculty alike are
         changed as they see God's hand at work.
     The growing student body needs a new women's
     dormitory. Our Thirteenth Sabbath Offering this
        quarter will make one more dream a reality.




              Missi                         fi•
                                             • )

                                                   N
             The Thirteenth Sabbath Offering on December 25
               supports projects in the Euro-Asia Division.
          LESSON             7       *November 6-12



      Daniel's History                            Lesson



      SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 7.
Memory Text: "Let no one deceive you by any means; for that Day
      will not come unless the falling away comes fast, and the man of sin
      is revealed, the son of perdition" (2 Thessalonians 2:3, NKJY).

             he vision in Daniel 7 (given about 553 B.C., the first year of

      T      Belshazzar's coregency with his father, Nabonidus) is largely par-
            allel to the vision in chapter 2. Some reasons for this repetition
      may be:
         1. Fifty years had gone by since Nebuchadnezzar had received his
      vision in Daniel 2.
        2. To repeat important matters is a good principle of teaching.
        3. Daniel 2 gave a general survey of the future from Nebuchadnezzar's
      days until the Second Advent. Daniel 7 enlarges on the time period
      between the fourth empire and Christ's return to earth.
        4. Daniel 2 portrays the worldly empires from a political and military
      viewpoint. Daniel 7 includes the spiritual power that plays an important
      role in the great controversy. Whatever the reasons for the parallel to the
      earlier chapter, Daniel 7 is a powerful prophecy, one filled with impor-
      tant—and relevant—truth for our time.

The Week at a Glance: What is the essence of the vision in
      Daniel 7? What is the fourth beast? What is the little-horn power that
      arises out of, but is still part of, the fourth beast? How did the
      medieval church justify its persecution of heretics? What does the
      time prophecy in Daniel 7:25 represent?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, November 13.
56
                 SUNDAY             November 7


      The Vision (Dan. 7:1-8).
        In his vision Daniel sees the four winds of heaven stirring up the great
      sea. As a result of it, four wild beasts emerge from the water.

What explanations can we glean from Scripture for most of the symbols
      appearing in this vision?

      Winds (Jer. 25:31-33)


      Water (Isa. 57:20, Rev. 17:15)


      The four beasts (Dan. 7:17)


      Lion (Dan. 2:38)


      Bear (Dan. 5:28, 8:20)


      Leopard (Dan. 8:21, 11:2)

        Any history book about the ancient world will confirm that the great
      world powers following Babylon were Media-Persia and Greece. But
      what about the fourth power, the dreadful and terrible beast? Though not
      specifically named in Scripture, history confirms that the power that
      defeated Greece was Rome, the only sensible identification for the fourth
      beast.

What are the similarities between the expressions used to describe the
      fourth kingdom in Daniel 2 and the fourth kingdom in Daniel 7?
      Compare Dan. 2:40 and Dan. 7:7, 23.


        World power may be said to have passed from the Greeks to the
      Romans at the battle of Pydna, in 168 B.C., where the Romans won a com-
      plete victory over Macedonia, which was divided into four confederacies
      that eventually became a Roman province. Thus, within another century
      of conquests, the world was united under Rome. History affirms, again,
      God's foreknowledge of world events.




                                                                             57
                 MONDAY November 8


      The Little Horn (Dan. 7:8, 23-25).
         The Roman Empire did not succumb to another world empire, as had
      the previous kingdoms; instead, it disintegrated. From A.D. 330 on, when
      Emperor Constantine moved the seat of government from Rome to
      Constantinople, a long decline began in the western half of the empire.
      Its authority slowly disappeared, its vitality evaporated, and its apparatus
      of government faded away. Into this void stepped the barbaric tribes from
      the north, who carved the empire up into many smaller pieces and in A.D.
      476 deposed Romulus Augustulus, the last of the Western emperors.

What happens to the fourth beast, as depicted in Daniel 7:19, 20, 24?

         The prophecy does not treat the horns of the beast independently; on
      the contrary, they are presented as a continuation of its activities. The
      horns correspond to the mingling of the iron with the earthenware in the
      feet and toes of the image of Daniel 2. As in Daniel 2, the fourth empire,
      as a single power, broke apart; this was depicted in Daniel 7 as the activ-
      ity of the ten horns. They represent the European nations that emerged
      from the Roman Empire and, to a large extent, maintained her civiliza-
      tion.

What are the specific characteristics of the little horn, and what power
      does it represent? Dan. 7:8, 24, 25.


         Historians tell us that "out of the ruins of political Rome, arose
      the great moral Empire in the 'giant form' of the Roman Church!'
      —Alexander Flick, The Rise of the Mediaeval Church (New York: B.
      Franklin, 1959), p. 150, quoted in The SDA Bible Commentary, vol. 9,
      article 1142, p. 878. Indeed, when the western half of the Roman Empire
      fell to the Germanic tribes, the Bishop of Rome became an important fig-
      ure in the West, and soon he exercised not only spiritual but also political
      power. "The Roman Church in this way privily pushed itself into the
      place of the Roman World Empire, of which it is the actual continuation;
      the empire has not perished, but has only undergone a transformation."
      —Adolf Harnack, What Is Christianity? (quoted in The SDA Bible
      Commentary, vol. 9, article 1359, p. 841, author's emphasis).

       Again, don't miss this point: The persecuting little-horn power
       arises out of the Roman Empire—it never ceases to be a Roman
       power. Why is this point especially important for us to remember,
       particularly in the context of last-day events, when all sorts of wild
       speculation is made about the identity of end-time players?


58
               TUESDAY November 9


     Persecution of the Saints (Dan. 7:25).
       Jesus warned (in Matt. 24:9) that His followers would be perse-
     cuted. What do you read in Daniel 7 about the activity of the little-
     horn power that fulfills this prediction?




        Christians were persecuted during the time of the pagan Roman
     Empire (the fourth beast itself), but the persecution mentioned in Daniel
     7:25 is a persecution of the saints by the little horn, which arose only after
     the pagan phase had ended. The best-known example of this persecution
     is the Inquisition. In the Middle Ages, the growing threat of so-called
     heretical groups led the church to use secular authority to repress what it
     deemed heresy. In today's climate, with all the talk about Christian unity,
     these atrocities are not talked about much anymore, but untold numbers
     perished at the hands of the little-horn power, depicted in Daniel 7.

It is difficult for us to comprehend how people who claimed to be
     followers of Jesus could torture and kill other Christians. How did
     they justify this horrible action, all in the name of Christ? See, as an
     example of this kind of thinking, John 16:2.




        The theological justification for the Inquisition was based on
     Augustine's (A.D. 354-430) understanding of Luke 14:23 where Jesus in
     the parable of the great supper, says, " "Compel them to come in" ' "
     (NKJV). Augustine took this to mean "Force them, if they do not come of
     their own free will."
        The great Roman Catholic theologian Thomas Aquinas (A.D.
     1224-1274) responded to a question concerning the heretics by saying,
     "If forgers of money and other evil-doers are condemned to death at once
     by the secular authority, much more reason is there for heretics, as soon
     as they are convicted of heresy, to be not only excommunicated but even
     put to death."

       However horrendous, this thinking should serve as a warning:
       Those who believe that God is behind what they do are capable of
       great evil. Why, then, do we need to be so very careful in how we
       seek to justify our own actions, particularly when we do them in
       the name of God and for what we believe is His cause?

                                                                                59
          WEDNESDAY November 10


      Changing Times and Laws (Dan. 7:25).
Compare Daniel 2:21 and Daniel 7:25. In what specific way does
      the little horn seek to take upon itself what belongs only to God?
      How does this action parallel with what is written in 2 Thessa-
      lonians 2:3, 4?


         The word for "times" in this text is the same Aramaic word rendered
      "seasons" in Daniel 2:21. God as the Creator of the times can change
      them, but the little horn arrogantly claims this power for himself by the
      attempted change of the "time" of the Sabbath, the one commandment
      that points to the Lord in His role as Creator—the role that makes Him,
      and Him alone, God.

Read the following texts (Gen. 2.•1-4; Exod. 20:8; Isa. 40:28; 44:6-8; 45:5,
      6). Together, what message do they have for us, particularly in the
      context of today's study?


         As Adventists, we love to circulate all sorts of quotes from early
      Catholic sources mocking Protestants—who claim the Bible as their rule
      of faith—for keeping Sunday, a day not commanded in the Bible but,
      instead, was formally instituted by the authority of the Roman Church.
         What was the reason for this change? Both external pressures and inter-
      nal pressures on the church forced many Christians to break radically
      with the Jews. The conflict between the Jews and the empire caused many
      of these Christians to develop a new identity, one that helped them avoid
      the repressive measures applied to the Jews under Roman dominion.
      Meanwhile, the Judaeo-Christians who insisted on the literal observance
      of certain Mosaic regulations helped push many others to sever their ties
      with Judaism in every way possible.
         Christians of the first four centuries never confused Sabbath with
      Sunday but for a time celebrated both, as indicated in the Constitutions of
      the Holy Apostles (pseudonymous work, c. A.D. 375). "Keep the Sabbath,
      and the Lord's day festival; because the former is the memorial of the cre-
      ation, and the latter of the resurrection."—The SDA Bible Commentary,
      vol. 9, article 1414, p. 878.

       The change of the Sabbath didn't happen overnight. Slowly but
       surely, with one small step at a time, the apostasy from God's law
       began. But it can happen only as individuals, one by one, allow it to
       happen. Had the masses stayed faithful, the changes never would
       have come. What lessons are in here for us?



60
             THURSDAY November 11


      A Time Prophecy (Dan 7:25).
        This time period of three and one-half times, or three and one-half
      years, is again mentioned in Daniel 12:7 and in various ways in the book
      of Revelation. Though space doesn't allow for us to show why, all the
      texts below are talking about the same time period.

Look up these texts and write down the time prophecies given in each
      one. What can we learn by comparing them with one another?

      Dan. 7.•25



      Dan. 12:7



      Rev. 11:2



      Rev. 11:3



      Rev. 12:6



      Rev. 12.•14



      Rev. 13:5

         A comparison of these texts shows that a prophetic year has 360 days,
      and thus three and one-half years is the same as 1,260 prophetic days, or
      42 prophetic months. As Adventists, we have long believed, and rightly
      so, that these prophecies demand the day/year principle. Among the bib-
      lical reasons for the day/year principle are the following: (1) The visions
      are symbolic, hence the times indicated should also be symbolic. (2) As
      the visions extend over long time periods, the times specified, therefore,
      should also be seen as extending over long periods of time. (3) The pecu-
      liar way in which the time periods are expressed also indicates that they
      must apply symbolically; i.e., the fact that the word years is never used
      in any of the time expressions can be explained only on the basis of the
      year/day principle. (4) The pragmatic test of this principle in Daniel
      9:24-27 indicates that, indeed, years are intended.


                                                                             61
                  FRIDAY November 12

Further Study: Read Ellen G. White, The Great Controversy, pp. 51-55.
       Notice the parallel between Daniel 2 and Daniel 7. We clearly can
     see how the two chapters are dealing with the same events, though
     from different perspectives.

        Daniel 2                   Daniel 7
        Babylon                    Babylon
        Media-Persia               Media-Persia
        Greece                     Greece
        Rome                       Rome
        Second Coming              Second Coming


Discussion Question:
      As mentioned earlier in the week, Adventists love to quote
      Roman Catholic sources that blatantly boast of Rome's author-
      ity in changing the Sabbath to Sunday. In most cases, however,
      those are older quotes. Rome, today, appears to be taking a dif-
      ferent tack on this issue. The best example is the apostolic letter,
      issued by Pope John Paul II in 1998, called Dies Domini (the
      Lord's Day), in which the pope admonishes the flock to be more
      faithful in keeping Sunday. What's interesting, however, is that
      instead of boasting about the church's authority to change the
      Sabbath day, as apologists for Rome and Sunday so frequently
      did in the past, the letter in some places sounds like our defense
      of the seventh-day Sabbath. The pope even goes back to the
      Genesis Creation account as part of the reason for keeping
      Sunday, even quoting Genesis 2:2. Why do you think Rome has
      changed its approach to its defense of Sunday? How does this
      change fit with our understanding of last-day events?

Summary: God granted Daniel a preview of world history from the days
     of Babylon down to the time when the saints will receive the kingdom.
     After the four world powers (Babylon, Media-Persia, Greece, and Rome),
     there was to come a religio-political power that would continue until the
     time of the end.




62
                            INSIDES
                                                             tog
One Good Accident
Jin Long*
   Brother Lee* is a Global Mission pioneer. He had been working in
southern China for several months without any apparent success, in spite
of his best efforts.
    Then one day Brother Lee was involved in a serious accident that also
involved another man. Both victims were sent to the hospital and placed
in the same room. During their lengthy recuperation Brother Lee had
plenty of time to become acquainted with his roommate. By the time the
men were released from the hospital, the two men had become good
friends, and Brother Lee had led his roommate to accept Jesus as his Lord
and Savior. In fact, the two men decided to work together for God.
    Brother Lee learned that his new friend's wife had been paralyzed by a
stroke and was confined to their home. She could not walk or take care of
herself. Brother Lee asked a kind Adventist woman to visit this man's
wife. The Adventist woman gave her massage and other natural treat-
ments. Before long the woman could stand and move slowly around using
a cane.
    This woman's healing created interest in knowing more about God, and
before long several people were meeting in a small group with Brother
Lee. They meet for worship in a small room that they have rented. The lit-
tle group is growing.
    Brother Lee is happy that the Lord has used an unfortunate situation to
bring him in contact with someone whose heart was searching for a better
 life. Through this unfortunate incident God continues to work in the lives
of this family. Even his friend's mother-in-law, a lifelong Buddhist, began
warming to the gospel as she saw the power of God to heal her daughter.
    The wife's healing continued through patient massage and natural treat-
 ments, and eventually she was able to throw away her cane and even
 resume working. Her mother has accepted Jesus Christ as her Savior and
 removed the idols from her home. A white sheet covers the wall where
 they once were encased, and today the little group of 11 believers meets in
 her home.
    Recently Brother Lee informed church leaders that the local religious
 authorities have given his group of believers permission to build their own
 church. With permission to build a legal church, surely the group will con-
 tinue to grow. Brother Lee thanks God for keeping His promise that "in all
 things God works for the good of those who love him, who have been
 called according to his purpose" (Rom. 8:28, NIV).

"Jin Long (all names in this story have been changed) is a Global Mission pioneer
working in China


Produced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Personal Ministries Dept. , 1
                                                                                  1111
Email:qomission@qc.adventist.orq
          LESSON             8       *November 13-19


       The Pre-Advent
       Judgment

                                        o
      SABBATH AFTERNOON
Read for This Week's Study: Dan. 7:9-14, 21, 22, 26-28.
Memory Text: "For the time has come for judgment to begin at the
      house of God; and if it begins with us first, what will be the end of
      those who do not obey the gospel of God?" (1 Peter 4:17, NKJI0.

               uring the closing days of World War II, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, a

      D       young German theologian, was escorted from his prison cell
              and hanged for high treason. In 1996, a court in Berlin officially
      declared Dietrich Bonhoeffer innocent of the charges that led to his
      execution.
         Something similar happens in the pre-Advent judgment. Though God's
      people are accused and maligned by Satan and his followers here on
      earth, before the universe they will be exonerated in the judgment. Indeed,
      the judgment is given in behalf of God's faithful people. The heavenly
      court will rehabilitate God's people and pronounce a judgment in favor of
      the saints (Dan. 7:22). This pre-Advent judgment is, then, part of the
      good news. Far from being a relic of Adventist history, the pre-Advent
      judgment is a vital part of God's plan of salvation—and only by under-
      standing it can one fully appreciate the good news of the gospel.

The Week at a Glance: Why would an omniscient God need
      an investigation? How does the great-controversy motif help us under-
      stand the need for a judgment? How does the idea of a pre-Advent
      judgment appear in the Old Testament? In the New? What is the pur-
      pose of the judgment? What kind of assurance can we have in it?
      What is the link between the judgment and the Second Coming?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, November 20.

64
                 SUNDAY November 14


      Investigative Judgments in the Old
      Testament (Gen. 3:9-19).
         Seventh-day Adventists believe that Daniel 7 teaches what has come
      to be known as the pre-Advent or investigative judgment. Interestingly
      enough, the concept of an investigation prior to judgment is found early
      on in the Bible.

What do the following passages teach us about the concept of an inves-
      tigative judgment? Gen. 3:9-19; 18:20, 21; 19:24, 25.


         From God's handling of the first sin, a pattern of judicial procedure
      emerges. First comes the inquiry, or investigation: " 'Where are you?"
      " 'Who told you?' " " 'Have you eaten from the tree?' " " 'What is this
      you have done?' " (Gen. 3:9-13, NKJV). Only after this investigation is
      completed is the verdict announced (vss. 14-19).
         The way Scripture depicts God's handling of Sodom and Gomorrah is
      also significant. Most of Genesis 18 and 19 describe God's deliberations
      prior to His punitive act.
         When Moses writes that God said "I will go down now and see . . ."
      (NKJEO, he is simply describing God's investigation of the actual facts
      before punishment is inflicted.
         A natural question is Why would God, who knows all things (see Job
      37:16; Prov. 5:21; Isa. 46:9, 10; 2 Tim. 2:19), need to conduct an inves-
      tigation? Didn't He already know exactly what was going on in those two
      cities? Plus, why did He have to ask Adam and Eve what they had done?
      Certainly, He knew what they did.
         First, at least in the case of Adam and Eve, it seems that He required
      an account from the perpetrators, and the process of inquiry heightens the
      awareness of the transgressors of the sinfulness of their actions.
         Second, it's crucial to keep in context the idea of the great controversy.
      We are not alone in the universe; the whole question of sin and evil and
      rebellion involves more than just humans (see Job 1; 2; Eph. 3:10; Rev.
       15:4; Rom. 8:22, 23). Other intelligent beings, not omniscient (as is the
      Lord), are watching (1 Cor 4:9). With this context and background in
      mind, we can better understand the need of an open investigation prior to
      judgment.

       How does the concept of the great controversy, with other intelli-
       gent life watching what is happening, help you understand the
       need for an investigation prior to the execution of a sentence? Why
       wouldn't it be fair to punish or to exonerate anyone in a trial with-
       out first presenting all the facts?



                                                                                65
                MONDAY November 15


      The Pre-Advent Judgment in the
      New Testament (Matt. 22:1-14).
        The concept of an investigative, pre-Advent judgment appears also in
      the New Testament. The parable of the wedding feast in Matthew 22 is a
      prime example.

Read Matthew 22:1-14. Where do you see the concept of an "investiga-
     tion" here prior to the execution of a judgment?

        The king's inspection of the guests represents a process of investiga-
     tion. The result of this investigation determines who may remain and who
     may not. In this sense it is a picture of the pre-Advent judgment in heaven
     going on now.

Read carefully John 5:28, 29 and Revelation 20:4-6. Where in these
     verses do you see the idea that a judgment has already taken place
     prior to the events depicted in these texts?


        Many Bible interpreters admit that Revelation 20 teaches two literal
     resurrections, separated by one thousand years. Inasmuch as only the
     "blessed and holy" come up in the first resurrection, a prior judgment
     must have taken place to determine who will take part in the first one.
        The Lutheran theologian Joseph A. Seiss writes, "The resurrection, and
     the changes which pass 'in the twinkling of an eye' upon the living, are
     themselves the fruits and embodiments of antecedent judgment. They are
     the consequences of adjudications then already made. Strictly speaking,
     men are neither raised nor translated, in order to come to judgment.
     Resurrections and translations are products of judgment previously
     passed, upon the dead as dead, and upon the quick as quick. 'The dead in
     Christ shall rise first,' because they are already adjudged to be in
     Christ."—The Apocalypse, Lectures on the Book of Revelation (reprint,
     Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan Pub. House, 1973), p. 181.
        Meanwhile, in Revelation 14 the harvest of the earth (vss. 14-20) is
     preceded by the first angel's message, " 'Fear God and give glory to Him,
     for the hour of His judgment has come' " (Rev. 14:7, NKJY). When we
     look at the sequence of events portrayed in this chapter, we conclude that
     the judgment spoken of in verse 7 precedes the execution of the judgment
     at Christ's second advent.

       Read again the parable and focus on one point: the desire of the
       host to have people attend his son's wedding feast. What does that
       tell us about the character of God and His desire to save all those
       invited to the feast?
66
                TUESDAY November 16


      The Son of Man and the
      Pre-Advent Judgment
        As Daniel watched the heavenly court scene, he saw " 'One like the
      Son of Man, coming with the clouds of heaven' " to the Ancient of Days
      (Dan. 7:13, NKJTO. The phrase " 'like the Son of Man' " simply means
      that this figure was in human form.

Who is this "Son of Man," and what is His role in the pre-Advent judg-
      ment? Mark 10:45, John 5:22, 1 Rm. 2:5.


        The "Son of Man" was Jesus' own favorite title for Himself. Others
      called Him Prophet or Messiah or Son of David or Son of God, because
      these terms meant to them a glorious conquering king who would
      immediately fulfill their personal and national hopes. But Jesus used
      this title about forty times to emphasize His connection with humanity
      (Matt. 8:20, 9:6, 10:23, 11:19, 12:8, etc.). At the same time, it was a
      Messianic title (based on this text in Daniel), and the chief priests rec-
      ognized it as such (Matt. 26:64, 65), which explained their reaction.
      Thus, one thing we can be sure of: Jesus is at the center of this heavenly
      judgment scene in Daniel 7.

What verdict is rendered in this heavenly judgment? See Dan. 7:22.

         What's crucial to understand is that this judgment ends with good news
      for God's people. First, verse 22 says that "judgment was given in favor
      of the saints of the most High" (NKJJ'9; that is, judgment was rendered
      in favor of the saints, of God's people. This is a chapter depicting, among
      other things, more of God's work in behalf of His "saints."

Read Daniel 7:18, 22, 27. Whatever the differences in the texts, all refer
      to one common element. What is it, and what hope does it promise
      for God's people?




         In Daniel 7, we see the Lord working in behalf of His people amid the
      turbulence, the persecution, and violence depicted in the chapter. We are
      in the midst of a great controversy; Daniel 7 focuses on one aspect of that
      controversy. Even more so, He shows us how it will ultimately end, and
      that end is good news for His people.


                                                                              67
         WEDNESDAY November 17


     Vindication and Condemnation:
     the Little Horn, the Saints, and
     the Pre-Advent Judgment
        If the judgment in Daniel 7 is really about the saints, why is it depicted
     in the context of the persecuting little horn?
        Good question, and the answer, very briefly, can be found in the
     Hebrew concept of justice and judgment, which involves not only the vin-
     dication of the innocent but the punishment of the guilty. The little horn
     does its evil against God's people; ultimately, there is a judgment that not
     only vindicates the Lord's people—" 'and judgment was passed in favor
     of the saints' " (Dan. 7:22, NASB, emphasis supplied)—but that brings
     the wicked little horn to final justice: "But the judgment shall sit, and they
     [the saints] shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it
     unto the end" (vs. 26).
        In other words, in the context of the pre-Advent judgment, the depic-
     tion of the demise of the little horn, the symbol of evil, makes perfect
     sense. It's no mystery that they are linked. It's typical in the Hebrew
     understanding of justice, judgment, and vindication: All occur together.

Read Deuteronomy 25:1 and 1 Kings 8:32. How do we see the concept
     expressed above manifested in these two texts?


        In both verses we see the principle shown in Daniel 7: the wicked pun-
     ished, the righteous justified. This is judgment, and it's why Daniel 7
     depicts in the context of the judgment the demise of the anti-Christian
     horn power. In the final judgment, not only are God's people vindicated,
     but the persecutor is punished.
        No question that the result of the judgment brings about the fmal
     demise of the little horn (after all, it brings about the end of all earthly
     kingdoms). The judgment, which leads to the Second Coming, is simply
     not limited only to the end of the little horn. It's a much grander, broader
     event that leads to the vindication of the saints, as well as the demise of
     their (and God's) enemies.
        "If there is a court case," wrote Roy Gane, of Andrews University "that
     results in one party winning and the other losing, it is because the two par-
     ties are opposed to each other. Through investigation, one is found to be
     right and the other wrong. The 'horn' is opposed to Christ. It speaks arro-
     gant words against 'the Most High,' oppresses His people, and intends to
     change God's law. The horn power is a rebel who claims control instead
     of Christ.
        "When Christ wins in the judgment, His loyal people win with
     Him."—Altar Call (Berrien Springs, Mich.: Diadem, 1999), p. 241.


68
             THURSDAY November 18


      The Time of the Pre-Advent Judgment
        While Daniel 7 itself does not provide us with a precise date for the
      commencement of the pre-Advent judgment, it does give us a time frame
      within which the judgment takes place.

What does Daniel 7:8-10, 21, 22, 25, 26 tell us about the time of the inves-
      tigative judgment?




        In all three depictions of the judgment, it is shown to begin after a
      specific phase of the little-horn power. In each case, the little-horn power
      and its activities are mentioned; and then the judgment scene begins in
      heaven.
        Meanwhile, we are given more details in Daniel 7:25, where the "time
      and times and the dividing of time" (or 1,260 years; see last week's les-
      son) is mentioned in regard to the little horn, with the judgment scene
      occurring after that time period is depicted. And to repeat what we stud-
      ied earlier: That 1,260-year period was linked with the little-horn power
      that arose out of the fourth beast, pagan Rome. This means that this judg-
      ment scene begins at least 1,260 years after the rise of the little-horn
      power (we use the dates A.D. 538 to A.D. 1798 to depict the beginning and
      the end of that 1,260-year period). The crucial point is that by the sixth
      century A.D. this entity had established itself as the great power in that part
      of the world.

If the little horn became a great power about the sixth century A.D., and
       the judgment occurs at least 1,260 years after, what approximate
       time do the texts show that this heavenly judgment began?


         What's important to understand about this judgment is that it is pre-
       Advent; that is, it occurs before the second advent of Christ. Indeed,
       verses 22 and 25 show not only that the judgment precedes the Second
       Advent but that the judgment is what leads to the Second Advent. As a
       result of the judgment, the saints possess the kingdom.
         Thus, what we see in Daniel is a powerful presentation of a judgment
       that occurs after the 1,260 years and before the Second Coming.

        Study carefully Daniel 7 until you can see for yourself the se-
        quence of events: little horn, heavenly judgment, Second Coming.
        Know it well enough to share with someone in a clear and con-
        vincing manner.

                                                                                 69
                     FRIDAY November 19

Further Study: "All who have truly repented of sin, and by faith
       claimed the blood of Christ as their atoning sacrifice, have had pardon
       entered against their names in the books of heaven; as they have become
       partakers of the righteousness of Christ, and their characters are found to
       be in harmony with the law of God, their sins will be blotted out, and they
       themselves will be accounted worthy of eternal life."—Ellen G. White,
       The Faith I Live By, p. 212.
          "Jesus does not excuse their sins, but shows their penitence and faith,
       and, claiming for them forgiveness, He lifts His wounded hands before
       the Father and the holy angels, saying: I know them by name. I have
       graven them on the palms of My hands. 'The sacrifices of God are a bro-
       ken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, 0 God, Thou wilt not despise.'
       Psalm 51:17. And to the accuser of His people He declares: 'The Lord
       rebuke thee, 0 Satan; even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke
       thee: is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?' Zechariah 3:2. Christ will
       clothe His faithful ones with His own righteousness, that He may present
       them to His Father 'a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any
       such thing.' Ephesians 5:27. Their names stand enrolled in the book of
       life, and concerning them it is written: 'They shall walk with me in white;
       for they are worthy.' Revelation 3:4."—Ellen G. White, The Great
       Controversy, p. 484.

Discussion Questions:
        0 Read the above quotes by Ellen White. How do you see in them
        a balance between grace and works? When she talks about those
        whose lives are found "in harmony with the law of God," is she
        talking about salvation by works or a faith that works? Explain
        the difference.

        0 The judgment in Daniel 7 leads to the Second Coming, an
        event of momentous importance. How should the realization of
        this importance help us to understand better our work as
        Seventh-day Adventists?

Summary: Following the three and a half times of the little horn's
    dominion here on earth, a tribunal is being set up in heaven. In this pre-
    Advent judgment, the sins of God's people are blotted out, the little horn
    is condemned, and the saints are given an everlasting dominion that will
    never be destroyed.




70
                            INSIDESt
                                                                 on!
Five Friends
Alex Leupin
   Five Adventist friends worked together in a woodworking company in
southern Chile. Times were tough, but the company had plenty of work.
One day the five men were called into the supervisor's office and told that
the company was going to work six days a week to meet orders.
   The Adventist men already were working extra hours every weekday in
order to avoid working on Sabbath. But the boss pressured them to agree to
work even more. When the supervisor saw that the men would not budge
in their refusal to work on Saturdays, he asked the five Adventists to resign.
   The friends talked it over and decided to trust God to provide work. They
agreed to quit. "God will provide for us," they said. "We are not worried."
   The men applied for work at a similar company in town and were hired
as sub-contractors. Their work continued for two years, until that company
began having financial trouble, and they were laid off.
   The friends built furniture to earn a living, but eventually this, too, did
not adequately support them. So the men found various jobs—one as a bus
driver, another as a chauffeur, and one continued making furniture.
   Alex, one of the friends, had long resisted an impression he felt to
become a pastor. He worried that he could not support his family and attend
college. But his wife urged him to follow his calling, so the couple sold
their car, and Alex went to school. It was tough, but God provided. Today
 Alex is a pastor working two hours from his hometown.
   Jerman [Herman] found work as a carpenter. But he loved talking to peo-
 ple about God's love. He began working longer and longer hours as a Bible
 instructor. He works without pay because the mission has no budget for a
 Bible worker, but Jerman does not care; he is doing the work he loves.
                               Jerman says, "I have grown in my faith over
                               the years of trials. God has helped me in the
                               past; I trust Him for the future."
                                  One of the five men has stumbled in his
                               walk with God, but the other four are support-
                               ing him to strengthen his faith.
                                  Alex sums up the men's experience this way:
                               "Losing our jobs was a blessing, as well as a
                               trial. It made us trust in God, and God never
                               fails."
                                Alex Leupin pastors a congregation in southern Chile.




Produced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Personal Ministries Dept.
Email:gomission@gc.adventist.org                                                  71
          LESSON              9       *November 20-26



      The Sanctuary Attacked
                                                               kikik
      SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's                    Study: Daniel 8.

Memory Text: "Yea, he magnified himself even to the prince of the
      host, and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place of
      his sanctuary was cast down" (Daniel 8:11).

             he vision in Daniel 8 is the climactic conclusion of the symbolic

      T      presentations in the book. Daniel 8, of course, is also where we
             have the seminal verse, "And he said unto me, Unto two thousand
      and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed," the verse
      that forms the climax of the chapter and that played a key role in the for-
      mation of the Seventh-day Adventist Church.
        As we begin, one point must be made clear: The historical context of
      the chapter shows that it's talking only about the sanctuary in heaven,
      where Christ is now our High Priest (Ileb. 8:1, 2). The key issues
      revealed here don't revolve around some military battle in which pagan
      armies defile the earthly sanctuary. The scope of the chapter goes way
      beyond any localized, earthly, political, or military struggle. The issues,
      instead, are spiritual; this chapter is a different view of the great contro-
      versy, one involving a massive religious system that has set itself up in
      opposition to the work and ministry of Christ and against His people.
        And, as we'll see, God's judgment is not only in favor of His people but
      against the little-horn power.

The Week at a Glance: How was the earthly sanctuary
      defiled? What do the symbols in Daniel 8 represent? Who is the
      little-horn power that arises after the breakup of the Grecian
      Empire? What is the nature of his attack against God's people and
      sanctuary?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, November 27.
72
                  SUNDAY November 21


      The Defilement of the
      Earthly Sanctuary (Ezek. 5:11).
How did the sin offerings defile the Old Testament sanctuary? Lev. 4:1-
      7, 27-31.


         When a priest or the whole congregation had to bring a sin offering, the
      blood of the slain animal was taken into the sanctuary Pm 4:6, 17). The
      blood of the sin offering presented by a ruler or a common Israelite was
      placed on the horns of the altar of burnt offering in the courtyard (vss. 25,
      30), but the priest had to eat a portion of the sin offering (Lev. 10:17). In
      this way, the priest symbolically bore the guilt of the sinner. When the priest
      then offered his own sin offering, he carried the blood that now represented
      the people's, as well as his own, sins into the Holy Place. In this way, every-
      one's confessed and forgiven sins were carried into the Holy Place, and the
      sanctuary was thereby "defiled?' This is clearly implied in the language of
      Leviticus 16:16, when on the Day of Atonement the priest had to make an
      "atonement for the Holy Place, because of the uncleanness of the children
      of Israel, and because of their transgressions, for all their sins" (NKJTO.
      This type of "defilement" was allowed by the Lord in order to atone for the
      sins of the repentant sinner. (See also Lev 15:31, Num. 19:20.)

In what other ways could the earthly sanctuary become defiled? Pss.
      74:3-7; 79:1; Ezek. 23:37, 38.


        In the Old Testament, God's temple was desecrated when foreign
      armies came in and looted the temple treasures. Scripture says that God's
      enemies also defiled the sanctuary by destroying it (Ps. 79:1). Yet, even
      prior to the destruction of the temple, the Hebrews themselves defiled the
      temple, not by their confessed sins but by setting up detestable things "in
      the house which is called by my name, to pollute it" (Jer 7:30; see also
      Jer 32:34).
        Thus, the Old Testament sanctuary could be defiled or polluted in dif-
      ferent ways: (1) by the confessed sins of the people for atonement pur-
      poses, (2) through the illegal contact of ceremonially unclean persons, (3)
      through the desecration or destruction of the sanctuary by God's enemies,
      and (4) by the Israelites themselves in setting up idols and foreign altars
      in the temple. With this background in mind, let us now study Daniel 8.

        Dwell a bit on this notion of defilement. What are some things that
        you, perhaps, by your own actions, might be defiling? How do you
        understand the concept of defilement? Does defilement always
        have to be physical? If not, why not?

                                                                                  73
                 MONDAY November 22


      The Vision of the Ram and the Goat (Dan.
      8:1-8, 20-22).

        Daniel 2 presented in broad outline the political kingdoms that would
      dominate world history. Daniel 7 presented the same outline with differ-
      ent symbols and introduced us to the political activities of the little-horn
      power. In Daniel 8 we meet some of the kingdoms of Daniel 2 and 7
      again, but the focus is on the religious activities of the little-horn power.

        According to the angel interpreter, what is represented by the ram,
      the goat, and the "great" horn that arises from the goat? Dan. 8:20,
      21.
         Alexander the Great (symbolized by the horn) first drove the Persians
      out of Asia Minor. Following his victories at Granicus (334 B.c.) and Issus
      (333 B.c.), he marched his armies down through Syria, Phoenicia, and
      Palestine to Egypt, taking time to destroy the kingdoms along the way,
      including the great sea-power of the island city of Tyre (332-331 B.c.).
      After defeating Egypt, he turned east and did not rest till he had reached
      India. He marched his soldiers 10,000 miles in approximately ten years.
      When he returned to Babylon he was only 32 years old, and the world was
      at his feet. Yet, in 323 B.C., at the height of his glory, he died of fever and
      exhaustion.

What was symbolized by the four horns that in vision Daniel saw replac-
      ing the notable horn? Dan. 8:22.


         Horns in Scripture, at times, represent political powers (Dan. 8:21,
      Zech. 1:18-21). Daniel predicted that the empire of Greece would be
      divided into four kingdoms—exactly what occurred. When Alexander
      died, power passed to his generals; yet, as the generals began to fight
      among themselves, the empire fell apart. The decisive battle among these
      generals was fought at Ipsus in Phrygia (301 B.c.). The victors divided the
      empire among themselves. Thus, the four horns represent the four king-
      doms (Dan. 8:22) that arose from Alexander's empire: Ptolemy took
      Egypt, Seleucus took Syria and the East, Lysimachus took Asia Minor,
      and Cassander took Greece. In his explanation, Gabriel also stated that
      these four kingdoms would not be as powerful as Alexander's kingdom
      (vs. 22).

       Look at how accurately Daniel predicted events that occurred
       years, even centuries, after his death. How should prophecies like
       this help increase our faith?



74
                TUESDAY November 23


     The Rise of the Little Horn
        Daniel 8:8, 9 says when the large horn was broken, "in place of it four
     notable ones came up toward the four winds of heaven. And out of one of
     them came a little horn" (NKJTO.
        Most commentators assume that the little horn came out of one of four
     horns, but Hebrew grammar implies something else, that the "little-horn"
     power came from one of "the winds of heaven," not from the four horns.
        However, the last part of verse 8 says, "four notable ones came up
     toward the four winds of heaven." Thus the phrase "the four winds of
     heaven" is the nearest antecedent to "one of them;' not "the four horns."
     The little horn, therefore comes out of one of the four winds (the direc-
     tions of the compass) rather than from one of the four horns.
     Furthermore, the little horn grows toward three geographic entities, "the
     south," "the east;' and "the Glorious Land." This second activity of the
     little horn suggests that the first activity, "the coming out," also belongs
     to the geographic plane, the four points of the compass.
        From history we know that the power that came after the four Grecian
     empires was Rome, which arose from a point westward of these
     empires.

Look at the chart below. How do the parallels between the three chap-
      ters help us see why Rome must be the little-horn power in Daniel 8?

        Daniel 2                      Daniel 7                      Daniel 8
        Babylon                       Babylon
        Media-Persia                  Media-Persia                  Media-Persia
        Greece                        Greece                        Greece
        Rome                          Rome                          Rome

         The crucial point to remember is that, in Daniel, not a lot of distinction
      is made between pagan and papal Rome. Both are viewed as one power.
      This is seen clearly in Daniel 7, for instance, where the little horn (papal
      Rome) that arises out of the fourth beast is still part of the fourth beast,
      which was Rome, only in its pagan phase. The little-horn power in Daniel
      8 arises after Greece and exists until the end time, when it is cut off with-
      out hand (Dan. 8:25). Pagan Rome rose after Greece and still exists, now,
      though, in the papal phase.

       Take time to study the parallels presented above until you could
       give someone a Bible study on this crucial topic.




                                                                                75
          WEDNESDAY November 24


      The Activity of the Little Horn
        The power that followed the Grecian kingdoms in history was Rome,
      pagan and then papal. The fact that prophecy says the little horn was to
      become exceedingly great, in contrast to Media-Persia, which "became
      great" (Dan. 8:4, NKJV), and Greece, which became "very great" (vs. 8),
      rules out the identification of the little horn with the Syrian king
      Antiochus Epiphanes, who was not greater than either Media-Persia or
      Greece. Rome—in both its pagan and papal phases—was. It's clear, how-
      ever, that Daniel 8 focuses mostly on the papal phase.

Read Daniel 8:9-12. Write down the activities of the little-horn power.
      What do you think this is talking about?


         Notice, first of all, the spiritual nature of the little horn's attack. He goes
      after "the host of the heavens" (vs. 9, NIV); he magnifies himself against
      "the Prince of the host" (vs. 11, NIV), and the "daily" is taken away.
      Whatever else the little-horn power does, it certainly seems to be a spirit-
      ual power doing things against God's truth. In fact, verse 12 says it cast
      "the truth to the ground."

What are some of the objects under attack by the little-horn power?

         1.The "Prince of the host!' In Joshua 5:14 the Prince is Christ. The
      Prince of the host of God's people must be the One called " 'Messiah the
      Prince' " (Dan. 9:25, NKJTO, " 'Michael, your prince' " (Dan. 10:21,
      NIV), and "Michael . . . , the great prince who stands watch over the sons
      of your people" (Dan. 12:1, NKJJO, or Christ.
         2. The "daily." The Hebrew word tamid ("continual!' "perpetual!' or
      "daily") appears 103 times in the Old Testament. It is frequently used in
      connection with the "daily" service in the sanctuary. This text shows that
      Christ's daily ministry in the heavenly sanctuary is coming under attack
      by the little horn.
         3."The place of His sanctuary" There are two sanctuaries in Scripture.
      The earthly (Exod. 25:9, 40) and the heavenly (Heb. 8:1-6). The Old
      Testament sanctuary was destroyed in A.D. 70. Yet, even at that time it was
      not "His [God's] sanctuary" anymore (Matt. 23:37-39; 27:50, 51). The
      only sanctuary functioning as "His sanctuary" at the time of the little horn
      (the papacy) was the heavenly sanctuary. Thus, the attack of the little horn
      is an attack on the heavenly sanctuary itself.

       Attacks don't always have to be physical. By distorting something,
       we can attack it, as well. Dwell on this idea in the context of the
       week's lesson. (See Dan. 8:12.)

76
             THURSDAY November 25


      The Little Horn and the Daily (Dan. 8:11, 12, 24,
      25).

How did the little horn take away the daily sacrifice and cast down the
      place of Christ's sanctuary? Dan. 8:11.


        By placing the intercession for humans into the hands of the priests
      through the confessional and by sacrificing Christ anew in every Mass,
      the papacy has removed Christ's heavenly ministry from the thinking of
      humanity.

Daniel also saw that "an army was given over to the horn to oppose the
      daily sacrifices; and he cast truth down to the ground" (vs. 12, NKJTO.
      What "army" was given over to the little horn (Dan. 8:12)?


         In the Old Testament, the sanctuary had an "army" of ministering Levites.
      The little horn has its own army of ministers who serve the system.
         "The sacrifice of Christ and the sacrifice of the Eucharist [Mass] are
      one single sacrifice. . . . 'In this divine sacrifice which is celebrated in
      the Mass, the same Christ who offered himself once in a bloody man-
      ner on the altar of the cross is contained and is offered in an unbloody
      manner.' "—Catechism of the Catholic Church (New York: Doubleday,
      1994), no. 1367, p. 381.
         It is through this kind of teaching that the ministry of Christ in the heav-
      enly sanctuary has been overthrown in the minds of many Christians and
      its place effectively taken by misleading substitutes. Through the Mass
      and the confessional, the minds of Christian believers are drawn away
      from a continual dependence upon the mediatorial ministry of the Savior
      in His sanctuary. By elaborate ceremonies, all in the name of Christ, the
      ministry of Christ is obscured and lost sight of.
         The complete forgiveness that Christ wants to give to those who put
      their trust in His free and perfect righteousness has been usurped by a sys-
      tem that, in effect, takes the place of Christ Himself. Instead of relying
      directly on Christ and on what He has done for us, believers are taught to
      depend upon a church as the vehicle through which everything that Christ
      offers us is dispensed.

        Imagine if you were taught that no matter what Jesus has done for
        us, if you want the benefits, you must receive them only through the
        mediation of the Adventist Church itself. In other words, all that
        Christ has done for us comes to us only through the vehicle of the
        church, which alone has the power to dispense God's saving grace.
        Why must all Christians reject such a notion, not just for our
        church but for any church?

                                                                                 77
                    FRIDAY November 26

Further Study: To understand better the issues of this week, here are
      quotes, all taken from the new Catechism of the Catholic Church. In each
      place where the word Church is used, replace it with God or with Christ.
      This should give us a better understanding of what's happening in Daniel
      8. As you read these quotes, think of 2 Thessalonians 2:4.

         "It is in the Church that 'the fullness of the means of salvation' has been
      deposited."—Catechism of the Catholic Church, no. 824, emphasis sup-
      plied.
         "Basing itself on Scripture and Tradition, the Council teaches that the
      Church, a pilgrim now on earth, is necessary for salvation."—No. 846,
      emphasis supplied.
         "The Church . . . bears in herself the totality of the means of salva-
      tion."—No. 868, emphasis supplied.
         "There is no offense, however serious, that the Church cannot for-
      give."—No. 982, emphasis supplied.
         "Were there no forgiveness of sins in the Church, there would be no
      hope of life to come or eternal liberation."—No. 983, emphasis supplied.

Discussion Questions:
       0 Why must Seventh-day Adventists—in this ecumenical age,
       when most churches work toward Christian unity—stand firm
       on its view regarding the identity of the little horn?

       0 It must be remembered that the word antichrist doesn't mean
       merely "against Christ" but, in fact, means "in place of Christ."
       With this definition in mind, go back over those statements
       quoted above from the Catechism of the Catholic Church. What
       conclusions must one, then, draw regarding Rome?

Summary: The vision of the ram (Media-Persia) and the goat (Greece)
      form the backdrop to the rise of the little-horn power (pagan and papal
      Rome). The focus, however, is on the religious activities of the little horn.
      By substituting the confessional and the Mass for Christ's ministry in
      heaven, the little horn took away the daily and cast down or defiled the
      place of His sanctuary.




78
                           INSIDE t0

Saying Yes to God
Agness Nhyama
   I come from a family that worships gods of stone and wood. When my
elder sister began attending the Adventist church, my parents saw the posi-
tive changes in her life and permitted the rest of us to attend church too.
When we attended church, an hour's walk from our village, we stayed all
day.
   Some people objected to Christians living in our village. When the vil-
lage elders told my father that we should not attend the Christian church,
my father told us to stop going. My sister was afraid to disobey my father
and stayed home to work on our family farm. But I got up early and went
to church. When I returned that evening, Father was angry. "If you are my
daughter, then do not disobey me," he said.
   But the next Sabbath I again went to church. And when I returned home,
my father was waiting. "You said you are my daughter, but you do not
obey me," he said. "Leave this house. Go and find someone who will keep
you. You are no longer my daughter."
   I stayed with my brother that night. But the next day my father sent for
me. "You can attend church as you like," he said.
   I wanted to attend secondary school, but my parents objected. They
wanted me to marry and refused to pay my tuition. So I began selling lit-
erature to pay my way through school. They were so proud when I gradu-
ated; but when I told them I wanted to attend college, they thought I was
crazy!
   I learned about Tanzania Adventist College and applied to attend. I have
sold books to pay my way through college. I was determined to learn as
 much as I could about God's will for me.
                                Saying Yes to God has changed my life.
                              When I think of where I came from, the chal-
                              lenges God has brought me through, and the
                              joys I've experienced serving God, I do not
                              worry about my future. I know God has a
                              work for me to do. I love Him and want to
                              serve Him all of my life.
                                I pray that one day my parents will give
                              their lives to God. That will be the greatest
                              day for me!

                               Agness Nhyama (left) has recently completed her studies
                               at Tanzania Adventist College in Tanzania, East Africa.




Produced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Personal Ministries Dept. 111111
Email:gomission4gc.adyentist.org                                               9 -
         LESSON 1 0 *November 27—December 3



      The Sanctuary Cleansed




      SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 8:9-14.
Memory Text:" 'How long will the vision be ... ?' And he said to
      me, Tor two thousand three hundred days; then the sanctuary shall
      be cleansed' " (Daniel 8:13, 14, NKJV).



      m           any Christians believe that Daniel 8 was fulfilled in the days of
                  the Syrian king Antiochus Epiphanes (second century B.c.)
                  whom they identify with the little horn. Some see this king also
      as a type of a future antichrist. As Seventh-thy Adventists, we must force-
      fully reject these interpretations for numerous reasons, one being that,
      historically, Antiochus does not fit the description of the little-horn power
      at all. Instead, on the basis of the historicist principle of interpretation,
      which sees prophecy fulfilled throughout history (the interpretation that
      the texts in Daniel themselves demand), we believe that Daniel 8:9-14
      refers to the great controversy between Christ and Satan, in particular, the
      spiritual battle between God's plan of salvation and the counterfeit system
      of the little horn, all of which will end at the second coming of Christ.

The Week at a Glance: Why does the sanctuary need cleans-
      ing? Why must the 2,300 days be understood as prophetic time? Why
      do we believe that the judgment in Daniel 7 is the same as the cleans-
      ing of the sanctuary in Daniel 8? Why must the sanctuary depicted
      in Daniel 8 be the sanctuary in heaven and not one on earth? What
      happens when that sanctuary is cleansed?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, December 4.


80
                 SUNDAY              November 28


     The Old Testament Tabernacle
     Is Cleansed (Lev. 16:29-33).
         The Old Testament—sacrificial service had two parts: the daily serv-
      ice—and, once a year, the yearly service (the Day of Atonement). In the
      daily, the priests every day presented the required burnt sacrifices. The
      Israelites could then bring their own offerings, which—with priestly help
      and under their supervision—would be sacrificed. By the daily service
      throughout the year, the sins of the people of Israel were transferred to the
      sanctuary, and it, thereby, became defiled.

Read Leviticus 16:16, 19. What is being cleansed, and what is it being
      cleansed from?


How was the Old Testament sanctuary cleansed from the defilement of
      the sins of the people? Lev. 16:15-19.


        Once a year, on the Day of Atonement, a special ceremony cleansed the
      sanctuary from the peoples' sins that had accumulated through the year.
      On that day, the high priest first brought a sacrifice for himself and his
      family. Then he cast lots over two goats—one for the Lord and one for
      the scapegoat. Next, he killed the Lord's goat and carried its blood into
      the Most Holy, where he sprinkled it on and before the mercy seat. On his
      way out, he put blood on the horns of the altar of incense, as well as on
      the altar of burnt offering. Through this ceremony, he cleansed the sanc-
      tuary from the accumulated sins of the people.

What was symbolized by the goat for the Lord? Heb. 9:11, 12.

        The Old Testament sacrifices were types (symbols) of the sacrifice of
      Christ. When God looked at the altar in the old covenant, He did not see
      the death of the animals. Rather, He saw the Lamb of God on the cross at
      Golgotha, the bloody sacrifice of His Son, and on the basis of this atone-
      ment He forgave the sinner. The Day of Atonement ritual is another
      expression of how God saves His people on the basis of Christ's blood
      shed for them.

        Study the ritual in Leviticus 16. Notice the emphasis on blood. How
        many times is blood mentioned in the chapter? What does that tell
        us about how cleansing and forgiveness were accomplished? See
        also Matt. 26:28; 1 Pet. 1:18, 19; 1 John 1:7.


                                                                                81
                 MONDAY November 29


      For Two Thousand Three Hundred Days
      (Dan. 8:14).

Many interpret the 2,300 days as literal days and apply them to
    Antiochus Epiphanes in the second century B.C., despite the fact that
    Antiochus cannot be made to fit the 2,300 days, no matter how tor-
    turously they contort the text. How can we show that the 2,300 days
    mean 2,300 years and that the prophecy reaches a time period long
    after Antiochus?


        Though there are numerous proofs that the 2,300 days here mean
      "years," today we will look at only two. (See Friday's section for more.)
         First, Gabriel gives the prophecy an end-time interpretation, which
      wouldn't fit if it applied to events that were fmished prior even to the birth
      of Jesus.
         Second, when we compare the historical events in Daniel 2, 7, and 8,
      we find that all three chapters begin with the ancient kingdoms of
      Babylon or Media-Persia and continue to the end:

      Daniel 2                 Daniel 7                  Daniel 8
      Babylon                  Babylon
      Media-Persia             Media-Persia             Media-Persia
      Greece                   Greece                   Greece
      Pagan Rome               Pagan Rome               Pagan Rome
      Papal Rome               Papal Rome               Papal Rome
                               Judgment in heaven       Cleansing of the sanctuary
     1
     Stone cut out             Saints get the               stroyed without hand
     without hand
     (Second Coming)
                               kingdom
                               (Second Coming)
                                                        E(Second Coming)


         The parallelism between these chapters proves that Daniel 8 cannot
      be limited to the second century a.c. For instance, the little-horn power
      is "broken without hand" (Dan. 8:25), just as the stone that was "cut
      out . . . without hands" (Dan. 2:45); both are end-time events. The
      2,300 days, then, could hardly be literal and extend that far into the
      future. Hence, the need to apply the day/year principle.
         Then there's the parallel between the judgment in Daniel 7 (vs. 26),
      which leads to the Second Coming and the cleansing of the sanctuary in
      Daniel 8. Because they are the same event and because that judgment
      occurs prior to the Second Coming, the cleansing of the sanctuary is also
      an end-time event, something that it could not be if the 2,300 days were
      literal.



82
               TUESDAY November 30


     The Heavenly Sanctuary (Heb. 8:1, 2).
        Yesterday's study showed why the 2,300 days of Daniel 8:14 weren't
     literal days, but years, which placed the cleansing of the sanctuary in the
     end times. We proved this by showing that the cleansing of the sanctuary
     was the same event as the pre-Advent judgment in Daniel 7.
        Indeed, in Daniel 7—after the 1,260 years of dominance of the little
     horn the next great event is the judgment. In Daniel 8, after the attacks
     of the little horn on God's people and on Christ and His sanctuary, the
     next great event is the cleansing of the sanctuary at the end of the 2,300
     years. The cleansing of the sanctuary in Daniel 8:14, therefore, is the
     same event as the judgment in Daniel 7:9-14 (see the chart in previous
     day's study).

     Daniel 7                                 Daniel 8
     Little horn (vss. 24, 25)                Little horn (vss. 9-12)
     Judgment (vs. 26)                        Sanctuary cleansed (vs. 14)

       Take the time to study the above chart, and the chart from yester-
     day, until you can see this crucial point: that the judgment in heaven
     in Daniel 7 is the same thing as the cleansing of the sanctuary in
     Daniel 8.

        Two points need to be looked at here. First, we saw from lesson 8 that
     the judgment in heaven in Daniel 7, which occurs after the 1,260 years,
     is an event that comes down to the last few centuries. The judgment, then,
     begins sometime in this time frame (remember, it's this judgment that
     leads to the Second Coming). Second, because the cleansing of the sanc-
     tuary is the same event, it, too, is something that has happened in more
     recent times, as opposed to something prior to the life and death of Jesus
     (which was when Antiochus Epiphanes had defiled the sanctuary in
     Jerusalem).

Given the time frame of the judgment, which occurs long after the
     earthly temple was destroyed, what's the only possible sanctuary
     being referred to here? Heb. 8:1, 2.




        The answer, of course, is the sanctuary in heaven; it couldn't be any
      other one.


                                                                             83
          WEDNESDAY December 1


      How Long?
Read Daniel 8:13, carefully. What question is being asked?

         What's crucial to see in the question is that the word concerning or the
      word about does not appear in the Hebrew, nor does Hebrew grammar
      allow for it. Thus, the question isn't just about the activity of the little
      horn. Instead, the question is about everything depicted in the chapter,
      which includes the vision about the ram and the goat (Media-Persia and
      Greece), as well as the activity of the little horn (pagan and papal Rome).
      A literal translation would read, "How long the vision, the daily, and the
      transgression of desolation to give the sanctuary and the host a tram-
      pling?" In other words, the question only lists key events that happened
      in the vision. In fact, the word for "vision" in verse 13 is hazon, which
      deals with the ram and the goat; that is, Media-Persia and Greece.
         The question, then, could be paraphrased this way: How long will all
      these things, from the rise ofMedia-Persia, the rise of Greece, and finally
      to Rome's attack on Christ's heavenly ministry, be allowed to go on?
         The answer, then, is that the sanctuary in heaven will be cleansed (or
      that the judgment in heaven will sit) beginning at the end of the 2,300
      years. And, of course, as a result of that judgment, the saints receive the
      kingdom (Dan. 7:26-28).
         The crucial point to see is that prophecy covers all the events of the
      chapter, which deal with the history of God's people from Media-Persia
      until the end of the age.

How does the parallel between the judgment in Daniel 7 and the cleans-
      ing of the sanctuary in Daniel 8 help us to understand better both the
      meaning of the judgment and the cleansing of the sanctuary?




         Daniel 7 clearly shows that the pre-Advent judgment leads not only to
      the demise of the little horn but to the vindication of the saints and the
      establishment of God's kingdom. Daniel 8 introduces the heavenly sanc-
      tuary into the judgment equation, showing that the judgment in heaven
      parallels the cleansing of the heavenly sanctuary. Indeed, the cleansing of
      the heavenly sanctuary from the sins of the faithful corresponds to the
      cleansing of the Mosaic tabernacle on the Day of Atonement once each
      year (Lev 16:30), which was also a day of judgment. At the same time, the
      judgment scene helps us see the cleansing of the sanctuary in the terms of
      the final judgment. Together, both reveal not only the reality of the heav-
      enly judgment but the centrality of the sanctuary to that judgment.

84
             THURSDAY December 2


     The Sanctuary Shall Be Cleansed
        Daniel 8:14 says that the sanctuary needs to be cleansed. Why?


       In previous lessons, we learned that both the little horn and the saints
     defile the heavenly sanctuary.
       1.In the Old Testament, the enemies of God's people could defile the
     sanctuary by destroying it (Pss. 74:3-7, 79:1). In Daniel 8:11 the little
     horn symbolically casts down the place of the sanctuary and thereby also
     profanes it.
       2. In the Old Testament, the sins of the people defiled the sanctuary
     here on earth through illegal contact (Lev 16:16; 20:3; Ezek. 23:37, 38).
       3. In the Old as well as in New Testament times, confessed sins also
     defiled the heavenly sanctuary for the purpose of atonement, of which
     the earthly sanctuary was but a shadow.
       Thus, the cleansing of the sanctuary deals with two issues here: the
     vindication of God's people and the demise of the little horn. In the judg-
     ment, the little-horn power is destroyed, and the saints—whose sins have
     been forgiven by the blood of Jesus—stand vindicated, thus receiving the
     eternal kingdom, as shown in Daniel 7.
        Daniel 7 and 8 reveal what we talked about earlier: Judgment involved
     not only the vindication of the righteous but the punishment of the
     wicked. This concept helps explain the prevalence of the little horn in
     these prophecies. The judgment in favor of the saints leads to the demise
     of the little-horn power.

What is the importance of the doctrine of the pre-Advent judgment?


         1.Its historical importance lies in the fact that it provides an explana-
      tion for the disappointment in 1844. The recognition that Jesus in 1844
      began the second phase of His ministry in heaven explained why He did
      not come to this earth on October 22, 1844 (Rev 10:9, 10).
         2. It is theologically important in the sense that the pre-Advent judg-
      ment serves as the fmal review for the lives of those who will enter the
      kingdom. From time to time some of these saints have been adjudged
      guilty of various crimes by earthly tribunals when actually they were
      serving God and man faithfully. In the pre-Advent judgment these unjust
      sentences by earthly courts will be reversed by the court of heaven. In this
      way God will vindicate His saints.
          3. Finally, through the pre-Advent judgment, the righteousness, justice,
      and mercy of God will be proclaimed throughout the universe (Rev 15:3,
       4). Thus, the character of God, which has been in dispute through the con-
      troversy with Satan, will be vindicated (Rom. 3:4).


                                                                              85
                   FRIDAY December 3


Further Study: More reasons the 2,300 days of Daniel 8:14 demand
      the day/year principle:

      1.The vision itself is symbolic, not literal. Daniel 8 is not about rams,
         goats, and little horns. These are symbols. Thus, the time frame given
         in it should be viewed as symbolic, as well.
      2. The expression " '2,300 evenings and mornings' " (N1V) is not a com-
         mon way to express time, evidence that a literal time is not meant.
      3. As shown on Wednesday, the question in verse 13 was about everything
         in the vision, which included Media-Persia, Greece, and the activity of
         Rome (pagan and papal), an expanse of time covering thousands of
         years. The 2,300 days, if taken literally, span just over six years, an
         impossibility considering the events involved in the question. The only
         way, then, to make sense of the answer in the context of the question is
         if the day/year principle were applied to the 2,300 days. Only such a
         great length of time ever could begin to cover the events depicted.

Discussion Question:
       In Daniel 8:14, the Hebrew word for "cleansed" (nisdaq) comes
       from a common Old Testament word meaning "to be right," "to
       be righteous." This refers, first of all, to cleansing of the heavenly
       sanctuary from the sins of God's people, but it also addresses the
       restoration of the truth about Christ's ministry in the heavenly
       sanctuary. That which was symbolically cast down—the daily
       sacrifice, the truth, and the place of His sanctuary—will be
       restored at the end of the 2,300 years. Through the proclamation
       of Christ's high-priestly ministry in heaven in the first angel's
       message (Rev 14:7), the truth about God's intercessory ministry
       in heaven, which for centuries was obscured through the confes-
       sional and the Mass, has again been restored. Discuss the impli-
       cations of this understanding in light of our mission and message
       as Seventh-day Adventists.

Summary: Chapters 7 and 8 of Daniel enhance each other, revealing to
     us not only the reality of the pre-Advent judgment but how that judgment
     is directly linked to the work of Christ as our High Priest in the heavenly
     sanctuary. When the sanctuary is cleansed, not only is evil eradicated but
     God's people are vindicated, and truth is restored. Clearly we are dealing
     with an event of stupendous importance.




86
                            INSIDES
                                                               tOry

Home at Last!
J. H. Zachary
   Alex Schlussler was born into a conservative Jewish family, but he did
not practice his Jewish faith. Just before his 30th birthday Alex decided
that his life was going in the wrong direction; he needed God. He began
attending a Messianic synagogue, where he eventually filled leadership
positions. But Alex felt hungry for a deeper knowledge of God.
    Some Protestants encouraged him to enroll in a Protestant Bible semi-
nary, where he eventually earned a degree in pastoral ministry. Upon grad-
uation he became an associate pastor of a large Protestant church. There
he helped plant several new churches. While he enjoyed his work, he
missed his Hebrew roots. Over the months his burden for his Jewish her-
itage grew.
    He and his wife started a Messianic synagogue. It was good to sing the
Hebrew songs, preach from the Torah, and use his knowledge of Hebrew.
Then during a vacation to Florida, Alex and his wife decided to return to
their native state. They resigned their jobs, sold their home, and moved
back to Florida.
    One day a friend invited Alex and his wife to attend the Adventist syn-
agogue in town. Alex new nothing about Seventh-day Adventists, but he
 accepted the invitation. He was thrilled to learn that there were Christians
who loved the Sabbath, followed God's Ten Commandments, and prac-
 ticed the same dietary guidelines that Jews hold dear. Alex and his wife
joined the Bible class and eventually were baptized.
    "I was thrilled to learn that Adventists follow the Bible teachings about
 death and the second advent while rejecting the secret rapture," Alex said.
"We have found a people who truly follow the Scriptures. I did not go
                                looking for Jesus," Alex smiles. "But when
                                my life was crumbling, Yeshua [Jesus] came
                                looking for me. I was deeply touched when I
                                read the New Testament record of Jesus weep-
                                ing over Jerusalem. This presents a very dif-
                                ferent picture of the Messiah than any notions
                                I had ever heard. We have found God, and best
                                of all, we have found Jesus. I know that I am
                                home, at last!"

                                Alex (left) leads the music ministry in the Adventist syna-
                                gogue he attends in Port Richey, Florida. H. Zachary
                                was coordinator of international evangelism for The
                                Quiet Hour.



Produced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Personal Ministries Dept.
Email:gomission@gc.adventist.org
        LESSON 11 *December 4-10



      God's Timetable



      SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 9.
Memory Text: "And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an
      astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon sev-
      enty years" (Jeremiah 25:11).

               aniel, though "greatly beloved" (vs. 23) in heaven, identifies him-

      D        self with his sinful people and asks God to bless them. He inter-
               cedes with the Lord for his countrymen still in Babylon.
         While Daniel is praying, Gabriel appears and delivers what has been
      called "the crown jewels" of Old Testament prophecy. Sir Isaac Newton
      described Daniel 9:24-27 as "the foundation stone of the Christian reli-
      gion," because it predicted almost five hundred years in advance not only
      the time at which the Messiah would appear but also the duration of His
      public ministry, as well as His atoning death for sin.
         In studying this chapter, it is important to remember the links between
      Daniel 8 and 9. (1) The same angel revisits Daniel (Dan. 9:21). (2) Daniel
      recalls the former vision (vs. 21). (3) The command to Gabriel in Daniel
      8:16 to give Daniel understanding of the vision is repeated in Daniel 9:23.
      (4) The time element not explained in Daniel 8 is now the topic of Daniel
      9:24-27.

The Week at a Glance: What is the essence of Daniel's
      prayer? How does Gabriel link what he says to Daniel with the pre-
      vious chapter? Why is the day/year principle operating here? What
      is the starting date for the decree? What is the 70-week prophecy all
      about? What did Jesus accomplish for us at the Cross?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, December 11.

88
                  SUNDAY December 5

      Daniel's Prayer (Dan. 9:1-19).
         The first year of Darius was the year 539/538 B.c. Ten years had passed
      since the vision of chapter 8. During that time, Babylon, the conqueror of
      Israel, had fallen to the Medo-Persians, but the Jews were still in exile in
      Babylon.

Read through Daniel's prayer. Where are all the places in the prayer
      where we can see the need for obedience? As you read, keep in mind
      James 2:9 and 1 John 3:4. What does this prayer also tell us about
      the fruits of disobedience? Is disobedience any less serious today than
      it was in Daniel's time?




        One thing that comes through clearly in Daniel's prayer is that Daniel
      made no attempt to excuse or hide the sins of his people. His confession
      didn't seem to water down anything; he expressed it as it was. In fact, the
      chapter is filled with various Hebrew verbs, all denoting different kinds
      of sin and rebellion. There's an important lesson there for us regarding
      our prayer life: We must never downplay the seriousness of sin. Hell will
      be filled with those who did.

If you read Daniel's prayer, you will see that he is asking earnestly for
      God's mercy for His people. Does he express anything at all that
      would indicate that God's people deserve this mercy? If not, on what
      basis does he ask God for it?


        Daniel has nothing to offer the Lord for His mercy and forgiveness.
      All he can do is plead for it "for the Lord's sake" (Dan. 9:17), or because
      of the Lord's "righteousness" (vs. 16). This reminds us of Ellen White's
      words that "our great need is our only claim on God's mercy."—The
      Desire of Ages, p. 317. We have, as sinners, nothing to commend us to
      God. Our only hope is in mercy and grace, as revealed to us at the Cross.
      Here, and here alone, is our only hope, that which Christ has wrought
      out for us by His life and then His death. If we could earn God's mercy,
      or God's grace, in any way, then Christ wouldn't have had to die in order
      to save us. We could have worked our way out of the sentence of eternal
      destruction. His death proves our utter inability to do anything to save
      ourselves.

        Keeping in mind the above paragraph, go back through Daniel's
        prayer. In what ways do you see the gospel expressed there?

                                                                               89
                 MONDAY December 6


      A Heavenly Visitor (Dan. 9:20-24).
        Before Daniel finishes his prayer, the Lord sends an answer. The angel
      Gabriel, whom Daniel calls "the man Gabriel" (vs. 21, NKJI9 because he
      appeared in human form, makes a second visit to Daniel. He first
      appeared to him ten years earlier, in Daniel 8:16.

What was Gabriel's mission at this time? Dan. 9:22, 23.

         When Gabriel says in verse 23, " 'Consider the matter, and understand
      the vision' " (NK.110, he does not use the general word chazon, which
      refers to the vision as a whole, as in Daniel 8:1, 13 and in Daniel 9:21.
      Instead, he uses the verb mareh, which is used specifically for the vision
      of the 2,300 days—the only part of chapter 8 that Daniel did not under-
      stand. In chapter 8, Gabriel tells Daniel specifically that the vision, the
      mareh, of the 2,300 days was "true" (Dan. 8:26), but Daniel says that he
      didn't understand that mareh (vs. 27); that is, the mareh about the 2,300
      days. An Orthodox Jewish commentary—referring to Gabriel's words in
      Daniel 9:23, NICIV, "understand the vision [march]"—points right back
      to Daniel 8:14, saying that "this refers to Daniel's vision in chapter 8 in
      which the part which disturbed him so (v. 14) is characterized in vs. 16-
      26 as a [mareh]."—Hersh Goldwurm, Daniel (New York: Mesorah
      Publications, Ltd., 1979), p. 258.

"Seventy weeks are determined for your people and for your
      holy city" (Dan. 9:24). How long a time period is indicated through
      the seventy weeks, and what does the phrase "seventy weeks are
      determined for your people" mean?


        What we have here is more internal proof of the day/year principle. The
     command to restore and rebuild Jerusalem occurred many centuries
     before Christ. If taken as literal time, 70 weeks is just a year and a few
     months, hardly enough time to reach down to Jesus. Application, how-
     ever, of the day/year principle solves the problem: It covers the time span
     from the rebuilding of the city to the first advent of Jesus. In short, Jesus
     proves the validity of the day/year principle.
        Meanwhile, the root meaning of the Hebrew word chatak, here trans-
     lated "determined," is "to cut" or "divide." The extended meaning is "to
     determine" or "allot to." This is the only occurrence of this root in the
     Hebrew Bible, though it appears in later Jewish writings predominantly
     as "to cut off."




90
                TUESDAY December 7


      The Purpose of the 70 Weeks (Dan. 9:24).
What was to be accomplished in the 490-year period? Dan. 9:24.

         Six purposes are mentioned in this verse. They describe primarily the
      results of Christ's life and work here on earth:
         1. To finish the transgression. Transgression refers to the break in rela-
      tionship between God and humankind. Through His sacrifice on the
      cross, Jesus brought to an end the broken relationship and restored us to
      God.
         2. To make an end of sins. Gabriel here announces that the Messiah
      would take care of humankind's failures. He would take their sins on
      Himself and thereby make an end of them.
         3. To make reconciliation for iniquity. "Iniquity" is sin as in a perver-
      sion of what is right. Through the atoning sacrifice on the cross, Jesus
      Christ took care of sin in all its forms.
         4. To bring in everlasting righteousness. Through the Fall, humanity
      has become unrighteous. The Messiah, says Gabriel, will bring in a right-
      eousness from God that will be everlasting for those who make it their
      own through faith that results in obedience.
         5. To seal up vision and prophecy. The idea of sealing here doesn't
      mean "in the sense of 'shutting up,' but of 'confirming,' or 'ratifying.' The
      fulfillment of the predictions connected with the first coming of the
      Messiah at the time specified in the prophecy gives assurance that the
      other features of the prophecy, notably the 2300 prophetic days, will be
      as precisely fulfilled."—The SDA Bible Commentary, vol. 4, p. 852.
          6. To anoint the Most Holy. Temples were anointed to inaugurate their
      services (see Exod. 40:9). The anointing foretold in this verse points to
       the inauguration of Christ's priestly ministry in the heavenly temple after
       His ascension (Heb. 9:21).
          Thus, what we see here is clearly a prophecy, not only about the time
       of Jesus but about what His work will accomplish. And though this is a
       prophecy about His first coming, and though this prophecy applies in a
       direct manner to the Jewish nation as a whole, it gives inklings of the
       Second Coming, as well, because all that Jesus did at the First Coming
       finds its ultimate fulfillment in the Second. Perhaps that's also why this
       prophecy is so clearly tied to the cleansing of the sanctuary, an event that
       leads directly to the second coming of Christ.

       Look up the texts below, in light of this prophecy regarding the
       Cross. What do they, along with Daniel 9:24, teach us about what
       Jesus has done for us at Calvary? After reading all the texts, write
       out a paragraph that explains what Christ did for us. Isa. 53:5;
       Rom. 5:11, 17; 2 Cor 5:19; Phil. 3:9; Heb. 2:9.


                                                                               91
          WEDNESDAY December 8


      Messiah the Prince (Dan. 9:25).
        Daniel 9:25 states that from the " 'decree to restore and rebuild
      Jerusalem until Messiah the Prince' " (NASB) would be 69 weeks, or
      483 years. What date do we apply to this decree, and why?


         Various dates have been given for this decree, including 538 B.C., 520
      B.C., and 457 B.C. Let's look quickly at all three.
         For starters, suppose someone were to accept the 538 B.C. date as the
      starting point. From the command to restore and rebuild Jerusalem (538
      B.C.) unto Messiah the Prince, Jesus, would be 483 years (we're using the
      day/year principle, because the text demands it). Going 483 years from
      538 B.C. reaches to what? 55 B.C.—a date that in no way fits the time of
      Christ's earthly ministry.

Try 520 B.C. If that's the starting point of the decree, and we go 483 years
     later, what date do we arrive at, and why is that date unworkable?


         If, however, we go with the 457 B.C. date, the numbers bring us right to
      the time of Christ. This decree was given by Artaxerxes I, and it provided
      for the restoration of complete civil, judicial, and religious authority of
      Jews in their homeland (see Ezra 7:11-28).
         It's obvious that both the Jews and their enemies understood the decree
      to mean the rebuilding of the city. In Ezra 4:7-13 (the events in Ezra are
      not in chronological order), a group of Persian officers wrote to King
      Artaxerxes, complaining about the Jews who were rebuilding Jerusalem.
      In the letter, they stated two important points: (1) that the city was being
      rebuilt (Ezra 4:12) and that (2) the Jews who were rebuilding had come
      there because of the king. Said the letter, "the Jews which came up from
      thee to us are come unto Jerusalem, building the rebellious and the bad
      city" (vs. 12, emphasis supplied). In other words, the Jews who were
      rebuilding the city had come there because of King Artaxerxes, and the
      only decree issued by the king that sent the Jews back to Jerusalem was
      issued in the seventh year of his reign, the one shown in Ezra 7, a date
      that can be established as 457 B.C.

       Starting with year 457 B.c., what date will you come to 483 years
       later? (Remember: There is no such thing as "A.D. zero"! so, when
       you reach zero in the time line of history, continue counting from
       A.D. 1.) Answer: A.D. 27. Why is 457 B.C. the only date that works?
       Dwell on this amazing prophecy. It would be equivalent to some-
       one in the time of Martin Luther predicting the exact year
       Gerhard Schroder would be elected chancellor of Germany. What
       does this prophecy tell us about the power of God?

92
                 THURSDAY December 9


     "In the Midst of the Week" (Dan. 9:24-27).
       Review the 70-week prophecy of Daniel 9:24-27. Look at the chart
     below while you study:
                                   70 WEEKS-490 YEARS

                        7 weeks                                        1 week
                        49 years          62 weeks-434 years           7 years
      Daniel 9
      538/
      537 B.C.
                   i
                  457              408             B.C.    A.D.   27     31      34




        From the " 'command to restore and build Jerusalem' " (457 B.c.) to
      " 'Messiah the Prince' " (vs. 25, NKTO was 483 years, or 69 weeks
     (7 weeks and 62 weeks; see verse 25). This comes out to A.D. 27 (elimi-
     nate the year zero, which will extend the number one year later), when
     Jesus began His earthly ministry.
        Thus, this covers 69 of the 70 weeks. All that remains is the 70th week,
     the final seven years.
        Meanwhile, in A.D. 31, "in the midst of the [last] week," Jesus died, and
     the veil in the temple was torn in two from top to bottom (Matt. 27:50,
     51), indicating the end of the earthly ceremonial system. All those count-
     less animal sacrifices for all those long centuries, from Adam and Eve
     onward, now found their complete fulfillment in Jesus (Heb. 10:4). Here,
     in human flesh, the Lord took upon Himself the sins of the world, in order
     that every human being, no matter how sinful, could find forgiveness,
     healing, and the promise of eternal life (Rom. 6:23, 1 John 5:11).

The prophecy says that the Messiah will "confirm the covenant with
     many for one week." What does that mean, and when does it end?


         Our basic understanding of this, the end of the final week, is the
      covenant relationship between the Lord and national Israel. After that
      week (which comes to A.D. 34, and which we tie to the stoning of Stephen
      in Acts 7), the new covenant promises (Jer 31:31-34) went to the church,
      which—composed of Jews (the natural branch) and Gentiles (the wild
      branch)—became an extension of Israel (Rom. 11:17-21) and continued
      with the work of teaching the world about the true God, the Creator and
      Redeemer.

       The prophecy (vs. 26) says that the Messiah shall be cut off, but
       "not for himself." For whom, then, was He "cut off," and how does
       that answer capture the essence of the gospel?


                                                                                      93
                     FRIDAY December 10

Further Study: Read the chapter entitled "The Kingdom of God Is
     at Hand" in Ellen G. White, The Desire ofAges, pp. 231-235.

        In Daniel 8, the only part of the vision that Daniel didn't understand
     was the mareh of the 2,300 days (vss. 26, 27). In Daniel 9, the same angel
     interpreter who appeared to him in Daniel 8 (vs. 16) appears to him again
     (Dan. 9:21) and promises to give him "skill and understanding" (vs. 22).
     The last time Daniel needed skill and understanding was in regard to the
     mareh of the 2,300 days (Dan. 8:26, 27). Gabriel, then, in Daniel 9:23
     says to Daniel: "consider the [mareh] "—obviously the mareh of the
     2,300 days that he didn't understand. The mareh, of course, was a time
     prophecy, and the first thing that Gabriel gives to Daniel is another time
                                                                         prophecy, one that is
     457 B.C.                     A.D. 27          A.D. 34               "cut off" Cut off from
                                          A.D. 31                        what? Obviously the
                                                                   A.D.
                                                                   1844  larger time prophecy,
                                                                         the mareh of the 2,300
                                                                         days.
     • 457 B.C. Persian King Artaxerxes commands rebuilding of
                                                                            Thus, we have two
                 Jerusalem (Daniel 9:25, Ezra 7:11-16).                  time prophecies placed
     • A.D. 27 Baptism of Jesus; Jesus begins to preach and teach.       closely together, one
     • A.D. 31 Messiah "cut off in the midst of the week" after 3}       larger than the other
                 years. of ministry (Daniel 9:26, 27; Matthew 27:60, 61;
                 Mark 16:33-39.                                          and the smaller "cut
     • A.D. 34   Stoning of Stephen; Gospel introduced to the Gentiles   off" from the larger.
                 (Daniel 9:34, Acts 7:54-60, 9:15.
     • A.D. 1844 End of the 2,300-year prophecy; investigative judgment
                                                                            With the starting
                 begins.                                                 point given in the
                                                                         decree to restore and
     rebuild Jerusalem in 457 B.C., we arrive 2,300 years later at 1844.

Discussion Question:
      We saw in lesson 8 that the judgment scene in Daniel 7 (which is
      the same thing as the cleansing of the sanctuary in Daniel 8)
      came after the 1,260-year period of the little-horn persecution.
      Because the little horn first came to prominence in the sixth cen-
      tury, 1,260 years would come to the late eighteenth or early nine-
      teenth century. The judgment would begin after that. How do
      these numbers fit in with the date 1844, arrived at from Daniel 8
      and 9? How does the answer help confirm that our understand-
      ing of the prophecy is correct?

Summary: Daniel in his prayer identified himself with his people and
     petitioned God for them. In response God sent the angel Gabriel, who
     explained to Daniel that the Messiah would come at a specified time to
     reconcile humanity with God. How interesting, too, that this—the most
     crucial prophecy concerning Jesus—is just part of the larger prophecy,
     the one about the 2,300 years.
94
                               INSIDES
                                                                  tor)/
Newspaper Editor
Finds Peace
Ch. Victor Sam
   Abanidas (AH-bah-nee-DAHS) bounced along in the bus from Calcutta
to Arambagh (AH-ram-BAHG), India, enjoying the passing scenery.
Suddenly, he had an impression that the bus was going to be involved in an
accident. He closed his eyes and prayed, "Lord Jesus, please protect us."
   Minutes later the bus collided with another vehicle, throwing passen-
gers out of their seats. When all the passengers were safely out of the bus,
Abanidas looked at the weeping, bleeding passengers. Everyone had been
hurt except him. He was the only one without a single scratch, cut, bruise,
or broken bone. Abanidas whispered a prayer of thanks to the Lord, who
had saved him, the God he had just come to know and love a few months
earlier.
   Abanidas was a newspaper editor living in a village about one hundred
kilometers (60 miles) north of Calcutta, India. For 32 years he had been a
teacher; then he settled down to the quieter life of an editor. However, the
change of job did not bring him the peace and satisfaction that he had
expected.
   "I had many severe difficulties in my life," says Abanidas. "I had fam-
ily problems, village problems, political problems, and work problems. I
could find no solution to my problems and was in deep distress of mind. I
had hoped to find peace, but it eluded me. I felt adrift in an ocean of
despair with no hope for the future."
   It was at this time that Abanidas discovered a small group of people
worshiping in a nearby house each Saturday morning. He noticed that the
worshipers seemed to have a peace about them that he was longing to find
 for his own life. He began to attend and to listen to the teachings of the
 Bible.
   "Finally, in God's Word I found the peace and solution to all of my prob-
 lems," Abanidas testifies. "I found salvation and forgiveness in Jesus
 Christ. I decided to keep the Sabbath, be baptized, and to prepare for
 Christ's coming." He was baptized with some 2,000 other new believers in
 a mass baptism in Calcutta in 1999.
   Shortly after his baptism, Abanidas felt called to serve God full time. He
 resigned his job to become a Global Mission pioneer, and today he is help-
 ing others find the peace that he had searched for, the peace that only Jesus
 Christ can bring.

Ch. Victor Sam is director of the South Bengal Region, in Calcutta, India.



Produced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Personal Ministries Dept. _
Email:gomission@gc.adventist.org                                             9.
         LESSON            12 *December 11-17
       When Kings                        Go to War



      SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 10 and 11.
Memory Text:" 'Hear now My words: If there is a prophet among
      you, I, the Lord, make Myself known to him in a vision; I speak to
      him in a dream" (Numbers 12:6, NKJTO.

               aniel 10-12 forms a unit with three elements. The first part is

      D        chapter 10, the second part is the vision proper in 11:2-12:4, and
               the third (Dan. 12:5-13) concludes not only the chapter but the
      book of Daniel. The last vision given to Daniel occurred two years after
      the return of the Jews from Babylon. In this vision, God lifted the veil of
      history and showed Daniel some realities of the unseen world the
      conflict between the forces of good and evil. Revelation 12:7-9 reveals a
      similar picture: Michael and His angels fighting the prince of evil and his
      angels. Yet, the outcome in both books is the same—Michael, the great
      Prince, overcomes Satan and delivers His people, those "found written in
      the book" (Dan. 12:1).
         This, the last vision of Daniel, covers basically the same ground in his-
      tory as chapters 2, 7, and 8, while giving us a glimpse of the great con-
      troversy being played out behind the scenes of human history.

The Week at a Glance: What happens to Daniel in the
      beginning of chapter 10? What does Daniel mean when he talks
      about "the latter days"? How is the great controversy revealed in
      these texts? How does Daniel 11 parallel Daniel 2, 7, and 8? What
      texts reveal the role of Rome as depicted in these chapters? What is
      the "abomination of desolation" referred to in the book of Daniel?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, December 18.
96
                 SUNDAY              December 12


     Daniel in Vision (Dan. 10:1-9).
At the beginning of this chapter, Daniel has been mourning and fast-
      ing for three weeks (vss. 2, 3). Why?


         Though no apparent reason is given in the chapter itself, the historical
      circumstances in Palestine at the time may yield answers. The third year
      of Cyrus (535 B.c.) was most likely when opposition was incited by the
      Samaritans against the Jews, as recorded in Ezra 4:1-5. Daniel must have
      heard about the opposition of the Samaritans, and he fasted and prayed
      for his people in Palestine.
         "I lifted my eyes and looked, and behold, a certain man clothed in
      linen" (Dan. 10:5, NKIV). A day vision is here distinguished from a night
      vision or prophetic dream such as Daniel records in chapter 7.

What were the physical effects of the vision on Daniel and his compan-
      ions? Dan. 10:8, 9, 17.


         The effect of the vision on Daniel's companions was the same as when
      Jesus appeared to Saul on the Damascus road (Acts 9:3-7). The physical
      effects on the prophet himself were similar to that of the apostle John
      (Rev 1:17). He was in a trance, like Peter (Acts 10:9-11) and Paul (2 Cor
      12:1, 2), unconscious of his immediate surroundings for the duration of
      the vision. His attention was so fully absorbed in the things he was shown
      that he seemed to take part in them (Dan. 12:5-9).
         Compare Daniel's experience with Ellen G. White's: "Sometimes
      while I was in vision, my friends would approach me, and exclaim, 'Why,
      she does not breathe!' Placing a mirror before my lips, they found that no
      moisture gathered on the glass. It was while there was no sign of any
      breathing that I kept talking of the things that were being presented before
      me. These messages were thus given to substantiate the faith of all, that
      in these last days we might have confidence in the Spirit of Prophecy?'
       —Selected Messages, vol. 3, pp. 38, 39.
         "The testimonies either bear the signet of God or that of Satan. A good
      tree cannot bring forth corrupt fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth
      good fruit. By their fruit ye shall know them."—Ellen G. White,
       Testimonies for the Church, vol. 5, p. 98.

       Suppose someone were to arise in our midst today, having visions
       and manifestations similar to what happened to Daniel, Ellen
       White, and other prophets. How should we approach this person
       and his or her claims?



                                                                                97
                   MONDAY December 13


        The Latter Days (Dan. 10:14).
66   'Now I have come to make you understand what will happen to your
        people in the latter days' " (Dan. 10:14, NKJV). What were the "latter
        days" for Daniel?


            A study of the twelve Old Testament references to the latter days out-
        side of the book of Daniel shows that the expression latter days can refer
        to various time periods in history. In Genesis 49:1, NRSV, where the
        phrase appears for the first time, Jacob says to his sons: " 'Gather around,
        that I may tell you what will happen to you in days to come.."' Here Jacob,
        at the end of his life, looks into the future, and under prophetic inspira-
        tion he predicts major developments in the history of his sons and their
        descendants. He sees them settled in Canaan, notes the two leading and
        prominent figures in their history—Judah on the one hand (vs. 8) and
        Joseph or Ephraim on the other (vs. 22) and predicts that the Messiah will
        come from the tribe of Judah (vs. 10). Because Jacob is primarily describ-
        ing the future history of his descendants; that is, Israel, the latter days
        refer to the future that began with the conquest of Canaan and continued
        until the first advent of Christ.
            In Deuteronomy 31:29, Moses predicts that after his death the children
        of Israel would become utterly corrupt and that evil would befall them in
        " 'the latter days.' " This prophecy was fulfilled in the time of the judges
        (Judg. 2:11-16) and kings (Jer 7:28-34), when Israel repeatedly aposta-
        tized on a large scale. Hence, "the latter days" in this text were the times
        of the judges and kings. In Jeremiah 23:20 and 30:24 the phrase refers to
        the time of the fall of Jerusalem in 586 B.C.
           In Jeremiah 48:47 and 49:39 the time of the Persian restoration is in
        view. In other texts—notably Isaiah 2:2, Micah 4:1, and Hosea 3:5—the
        time of the Messianic kingdom is referred to as "the latter days."
           Thus, "the latter days" in the Old Testament outside the book of
        Daniel can refer to: (a) a specific future period in the history of Israel
        (Deut. 4:30, 31:29, Jer 23:20, 30:24, 48:47, 49:39); (b) the future his-
        tory of Israel beginning with the conquest (Gen. 49:1) or the monarchy
        (Num. 24:14) and reaching down to the time of the Messiah; and (c) the
        Messianic age (Isa. 2:2, Hos. 3:5, Mic. 4:1) or the time immediately
        preceding it (Ezek. 38:16).
           In Daniel 10, "the latter days" refers to the future, which began at the
        time of Daniel and ends with the second advent of Christ. We know this,
        because many of the prophecies, such as Daniel 2 and 7, unambiguously
        extend to the end of this present world.

         What does it mean to be living in the "latter days"? What danger
         is there of hearing that phrase so much that it loses any meaning
         for us?
98
                TUESDAY December 14


      The Great Controversy (Dan. 10:12, 13, 20, 21).
Read Daniel 10:13. What kind of battle is it describing? Where is this
      battle taking place? What forces are involved?




        "While Satan was striving to influence the highest powers in the king-
      dom of Medo-Persia to show disfavor to God's people, angels worked in
      behalf of the exiles. The controversy was one in which all heaven was
      interested. Through the prophet Daniel we are given a glimpse of this
      mighty struggle between the forces of good and the forces of evil. For
      three weeks Gabriel wrestled with the powers of darkness, seeking to
      counteract the influences at work on the mind of Cyrus; and before the
      contest closed, Christ Himself came to Gabriel's aid."—Ellen G. White,
      Prophets and Kings, pp. 571, 572.

Who is the "prince" of the kingdom of Persia (vs. 13)? See Ephesians 6:12
      for some help. Contrast the prince of the kingdom of Persia with the
      Prince in Daniel 10:21. Who is the Prince depicted there?




        As we see here in Daniel 10, although Satan and Christ were moving
      upon the mind of the Persian king, neither could force him. Human free
      will—though one of the greatest gifts we have been given—has come
      with a terrible price: Jesus on the cross. If we didn't have free will, we
      couldn't have sinned, and if we didn't sin, there would have been no
      Cross, because there would have been no need for it. Thus, in many ways,
      the Cross is the greatest example not only of the reality of human free will
      but of the consequences of our abuse of that free will. How crucial, then,
      that we do everything in our power to keep our will on the side of Christ
      and His holy law.
         The bottom line is that we are all, indeed, in the midst of the great con-
      troversy. Which side we wind up on, and which "prince" we ally our-
      selves with, is, in the end, our own choice and no one else's.

       If the veil between the seen and the unseen were pulled aside, what
       do you think you would see going on around you? Imagine the bat-
       tle for your soul that's going on right now. What can you do to help
       place yourself securely on the winning side?


                                                                                99
         WEDNESDAY December 15


      Kings From the North and the South (Dan.
      11:1-28).

         The visions in Daniel 2, 7, and 8 mention a succession of kingdoms
      from the Babylonian kingdom to the kingdom of God at the end of time.
      We should expect, then, that the last vision in Daniel (11:1-12:4)—which
      also deals with a succession of political kingdoms—would cover approxi-
      mately the same time span as the previous visions.

Which kingdoms are mentioned in Daniel 11:1-4? See also Dan. 8:2-22.

         Daniel 11 has brought out a variety of interpretations, even within our
      own church. Most modern interpreters see the wars between the succes-
      sors of Alexander the Great in this chapter. Though there is certainly some
      of this fighting referred to in the verses immediately following Daniel
      11:1-4, it cannot be (as we will discover) the subject of the whole chap-
      ter.

Verse 22 mentions a king who shall break the "prince of the covenant."
      Who is the "prince of the covenant" according to Scripture, and what
      is the meaning of His being broken? See Dan. 9:25-27.


         In Daniel 9:25-27 Messiah the Prince confirms the covenant, which
      God established with Israel on Mount Sinai. Isaiah calls the Messiah
      "Prince of Peace" (Isa. 9:6), and Daniel refers to Michael as "the great
      prince" (Dan. 12:1). "The prince of the covenant," then, is the Messiah,
      Jesus. What we have here, in verse 21, is a reference to Jesus' death at the
      cross, and this helps us follow the time line in Daniel 11 and 12.
         The Messiah was broken when, under the Roman Emperor Tiberius
      (A.D. 14-37), He was nailed to the cross. The "vile person" in Daniel
      11:21 is, most likely, Tiberius. This means that somewhere between verse
      4 (which depicts the breakup of the Grecian Empire after the death of
      Alexander the Great) and verse 21 (the death of Jesus), pagan Rome
      enters the picture. Most Adventist interpreters see the change from the
      Grecian kingdoms to Rome in either verse 14 or verse 16.

       No matter how difficult in places, Daniel 11 provides us with more
       evidence of God's ultimate control over human affairs. In what
       ways, when you look back on your own experience, have you seen
       such powerful evidence of God's leading, even though at the time
       things were happening you might have wondered where the Lord
       was? What lessons should you draw from those experiences that
       could help you with future trials?


100
             THURSDAY December 16

      The Abomination of Desolation (Dan. 11:31).
         In our study of Daniel 7 and 8 we saw that the succession of worldly
      powers was in each case succeeded by "Christian" Rome. In yesterday's
      study we saw that political Rome was in power when the "prince of the
      covenant," Jesus Christ, was "broken." This depiction of the death of
      Jesus gave us a powerful historical marker to help us trace the flow of his-
      torical events in Daniel 11.

What indicators do we find in the second half of chapter 11 to show that
      "Christian" Rome follows the succession of the political powers also
      in this chapter? Dan. 11:31, 36.




         While the rapid change of events in this chapter may seem confusing,
      certain phrases in verses 31 and 36 provide a link to chapters 7 and 8, and
      these help us to identify the main power in view in the second half of this
      chapter. These phrases are:
         1."Forces shall be mustered by him [king of the north], and they shall
      defile the sanctuary fortress" (Dan. 11:31, NKJV). In Daniel 8:11 the lit-
      tle horn casts down (profanes) the place of God's sanctuary
         2. "They shall take away the daily sacrifices" (Dan. 11:31, NKJV). In
      Daniel 8:11 the little horn takes away the daily sacrifices.
         3. "He shall exalt and magnify himself above every god" (Dan. 11:36,
      NKJV). In Daniel 8:11 the little horn exalts himself as high as the "Prince
      of the host."
         4. "He shall . . . speak blasphemies against the God of gods" (Dan.
       11:36, NKJV). In Daniel 7:25 the little horn speaks pompous words
      against the Most High.

The textual evidence, then, indicates that the main power in the second
      half of chapter 11 is again the little horn. What is the significance of
      the "abomination of desolation," which the little horn puts in place of
      the "daily"? Dan. 11:31.


        Daniel 12:11 has another reference to the taking away of the
        "daily" and the setting up of the abomination of desolation. In
        Daniel 8 the taking away of the "daily" referred to the obscuring
        of Christ's high-priestly ministry in heaven through the work of
        usurpation by the little horn. In Daniel 11:31 and 12:11, the
        "daily," Christ's ministry in heaven, is usurped by a false system of
        worship—"the abomination of desolation."

                                                                             101
                    FRIDAY December 17

Further Study: Read Ellen G. White, "Daniel's Prayers," in The
      Sanctified Life, pp. 46-52.

         "In the annals of human history the growth of nations, the rise and fall
      of empires, appear as dependent on the will and prowess of man. The
      shaping of events seems, to a great degree, to be determined by his power,
      ambition, or caprice. But in the word of God the curtain is drawn aside,
      and we behold, behind, above, and through all the play and counterplay of
      human interests and power and passions, the agencies of the all-merciful
      One, silently, patiently working out the counsels of His own will."—Ellen
      G. White, Education, p. 173.
          In Matthew 24:15 and Mark 13:14, Jesus refers to the "abomination of
      desolation" spoken by "Daniel the prophet." In both cases, Jesus places
      this "abomination of desolation" in a time future to Him. What this
      should tell us is that this "abomination of desolation" isn't some event
      prior to Jesus (such as during the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes) but
      occurs later than even His time, a fact that helps us understand better what
      it is.

Discussion Questions:
    0 Three times Daniel was told that he was greatly beloved in
       heaven (Dan. 9.•23; 10:11, 19). Few of us ever have an angel tell us
       directly that we are greatly beloved in heaven. How can we know
       that we are? What are other ways that God lets us know that we
       are indeed loved?

          Daniel 11 has been the subject of endless and wild speculation.
       From what we have studied so far, what parameters are found
       within the book of Daniel itself (such as in Daniel 2, 7, 8) that can
       help us, in our study of Daniel 11 and 12, keep from stepping out-
       side the correct bounds for understanding the chapters?

Summary: In Daniel 10 the prophet was given a glimpse of the spiritual
      battle between Christ and Satan. He was assured of God's love and esteem
      and was shown that heavenly forces are at work in the halls of earthly gov-
      ernments for the sake of God's people. In Daniel 11, detailed prophecies
      are given concerning the history of nations from the Persian Empire until
      the end of time.




102
                              INSIDE
                                                           St0rV

Touching Lives in Kosovo
Roy Richardson and Marija Trajkovska
    In a refugee camp in Macedonia, excited Roma [Gypsy] children waited
in the December cold for the ADRA van. The children had prepared a pro-
gram of folk music and dances and had been promised a holiday gift,
something new and nice. Most of the children had never owned something
new.
    When the van arrived, the older children hurried to help unload the gifts
that ADRA-Germany had sent for the children in Macedonia, gifts that
had been collected from churches and schools throughout Germany. While
the older children arranged packages and
refreshments on tables, the younger chil-
dren talked excitedly about their dreams
and wishes for Christmas and New Year.
    Emran, 10, and his brother Redzep, 9,
stared at their unopened packages. "To see
a package so nicely wrapped is an exciting
event for us," Emran said. "I have never had
such a nice toy in all my life," said Redzep.
Twelve-year-old Robert exclaimed over his
new shoes. "I have never had new shoes in my life!" And 7-year-old Sarah
sighed happily, "A minute ago I was drawing my dream. Now I am hold-
 ing my dream," as she proudly held up her new cap, gloves, and shawl. A
 little girl held up her new doll and exclaimed through tears, "When I grow
 up, I will have a baby. It will be clean, nice, and healthy, just like this baby
 doll! It's so nice, I do not want to hold it with my dirty hands."
    "At last some happiness has come to our camp," a grateful parent said
 as she looked at the happy faces of the children.
                                            When Jesus walked on earth, He
                                         delivered people from trouble, some-
                                         times with just a touch. This project
                                         has touched the lives of thousands of
                                         poor children and allowed ADRA to
                                         reach out to the needy. And the happy
                                         faces of children said Thank you bet-
                                         ter than any words ever could. "This
                                         is what God's love does for others,"
                                         said Roy Richardson, ADRA Trans-
                                         Europe Regional Director.

Roy Richardson is executive director of ADRA Trans-Europe. Marija Trajkovska (bottom left,
with children). is ADR.4-Macedonia country director. Above right. Serdjana and her doll.


Produced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Personal Ministries Dept.
Email:gomissioncagc.adventist.org                                             103
        LESSON            13        *December 18-24



      The Time of the End
      (or the End of Time)



      SABBATH AFTERNOON

Read for This Week's Study: Daniel 11:40-12:13.
Memory Text:" 'Those who are wise shall shine like the brightness
      of the firmament, and those who turn many to righteousness like the
      stars forever and ever' " (Daniel 12:3).

             he final chapter of Daniel sketches the events of world history at

      T      the concluding portion of "the time of the end," when "there shall
             be a time of trouble, such as never was" (Dan. 12:1). After receiv-
      ing the last vision, Daniel still had questions, but God reserved a full
      understanding of the visions to the time of the end, when those who
      would study Daniel's prophecies would understand their tremendous
      messages (vs. 4). We are, we believe, among those who have been called
      to understand.
         In chapter 12 we stand at the edge of eternity. Behind us, the great
      events of salvation history have unfolded: the Flood, in which only eight
      people were saved; the Exodus from Egypt, which gave birth to the nation
      of Israel; and the Cross, which brought deliverance from sin to all
      humankind. The climax of salvation history, however, is still to come—
      the great exodus of the redeemed from this sin-filled planet.

The Week at a Glance: What is meant by the phrase "the
      time of the end"? Why do we believe that Michael is Jesus? Why was
      the book of Daniel sealed until "the time of the end"? What does
      Daniel teach about the resurrection of the dead?

*Study this week's lesson to prepare for Sabbath, December 25.

104
                 SUNDAY              December 19

      The Time of the End (Dan. 11:40-45).
         The expression "time of the end" appears only in the book of Daniel
      (8:17; 11:35, 40; 12:4, 9). The context in each case indicates that it refers
      to the final period in history prior to the Second Advent. Seventh-day
      Adventists have generally identified the year 1798, the end of the 1,260
      years, as the beginning of the time of the end. Because the fmal verses of
      Daniel 11 seem to be unfulfilled prophecy, we need to be careful how we
      interpret them.

Which powers could be referred to by the terms "king of the north" and
      "king of the south" in the time of the end? Dan. 11:40.


        The king of the north. At the time of the end for the kingdom of Judah,
      Babylon was the enemy from the north (Jer. 1:14, 15). In the book of
      Revelation, Babylon is the code name for spiritual Rome—the papacy.
      Thus, the king of the north in the time of the end is the papacy. This har-
      monizes with Daniel 11:36-39, where the king who exalts himself is also
      the papacy.
         The king of the south. Some view the earlier use of the phrase "the king
      of the south" (in Dan. 11:5) as the Ptolemies, who ruled in Egypt after
      the demise of the Grecian Empire. Because this latter prophecy (Dan.
      11:40) applies to the time of the end, the phrase "king of the south" can
      no longer refer to literal Egypt. Revelation 11:8 uses Egypt to signify that
      which is opposed to true religion. These two powers are engaged in some
      sort of warfare.

Who in the time of the end could be symbolized by the nations of Edom,
      Moab, and the Ammonites? Dan. 11:41.


         These nations no longer exist, which indicates that this passage is not
      intended to be construed as literal. In ancient days these nations were the
      enemies of God's people, but God in His grace has promised to save
      many who were once His enemies. The church will be used of Him to
      conquer spiritually "Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of
      Ammon?' Many will come out of groups once opposed to the truth of
      God and join God's people in the time of the end.

        Though not easy to understand, these texts reveal that the world
        will be in chaos and turmoil right up through the "time of the end."
        What this should help us understand is that strife and toil, far
        from proving there is no God, help affirm His existence, because
        He has warned us about these things in advance. How should this
        realization help strengthen us to face future struggles?

                                                                               105
                  MONDAY December 20


      Michael the Prince (Dan. 12:1).
Read Daniel 12:1. It depicts two major events. What are they? From
      what we know as Adventists, describe what events it is talking about:




Who is Michael, this great Prince, who delivers God's faithful people?

         Adventists are about the only Christians who see "Michael" as Jesus.
      Consider the following evidence:
         1.The Hebrew word Michael means "Who is like God?" The only One
      who is like God is Christ (John 1:1).
         2. The "prince of the host" or "Prince of princes" (Dan. 8:11, 25) is
      also "Messiah the Prince" (Dan. 9:25). He is the same as "Michael your
      prince" (Dan. 10:21) or "Michael . . . the great prince" (Dan. 12:1).
        3. The word archangel appears only twice in Scripture, once in
      1 Thessalonians 4:16, where Christ comes with the voice of the
      archangel, and once in Jude 9, where Michael is called an archangel.

What is implied in the phrase "those found written in the book"? What
      book? See also Exod. 32:32; Dan. 7:10; Luke 10:20; Rev. 13:8; 17:8;
      20:12, 15; 22:19.




         Even the most cursory survey of these texts implies judgment, even for
      those who serve the Lord. Those "found" written in the book of life are
      saved, those "found" not written in there are lost. If this isn't some sort of
      final judgment, final reckoning, final separation between the righteous
      and unrighteous—what is?

       "The Lord desires us to appreciate the great plan of redemption,
       to realize our high privilege as the children of God, and to walk
       before Him in obedience, with grateful thanksgiving. He desires us
       to serve Him in newness of life, with gladness every day. He longs
       to see gratitude welling up in our hearts because our names are
       written in the Lamb's book of life, because we may cast all our care
       upon Him who cares for us."—Ellen G. White, Christ's Object
       Lessons, p. 299. Why do you believe that your name, right now, is
       written in the book of life? On what basis do you make this claim?

106
               TUESDAY December 21


      The Resurrection (Dan. 12:2).
         One of the most powerful and dramatic texts in all inspiration is Daniel
      12:2—the promise and warning of the resurrection from the dead. Here
      is a great truth that all the science, philosophy, and worldly wisdom could
      never unearth for us. We know it only because we have been told it, and
      we believe it because we have been told it by the Lord in His Word.

Read Daniel 12:2. What principle, what concept, do we see here in the
      text? See the following texts for some answers: Deut. 32:4; Eccles.
      12:14; Acts 24:15; Rom. 2:5, 6.




         Who hasn't at times been outraged at the lack of justice among us? All
      around, and every day, injustice taunts at us, mocks us, makes us angry
      and even doubtful. The devil, for sure, loves injustice. In so many ways,
      injustice and corruption seem to rule the day.
         Yet, implied in this one simple text is the promise and the warning of
      God's final justice. The righteous will be rewarded, the unjust will be pun-
      ished, and not by human beings' fickle, fleeting, and often perverted
      notions of justice and punishment but by a perfect, all-knowing, merci-
      ful, and just God who rewards and punishes. Hence, for those who will
      claim it by faith, the text offers us something that no human can: the
      promise of final, and perfect, justice—something not seen in this world.

What does this text tell us about death?

         "The Christian will make no mistake about it: death is an enemy. But
      at the same time it is a defeated enemy. This means that we can fight it
      with confidence, knowing that its temporary victories will not prevail. We
      can be on the side of health, peace, and all else that promotes life with-
      out being discouraged and fearful that the enemy we fight will fmally
      win."—"Resurrection and Glorification," in The Handbook of Seventh-
      day Adventist Theology, p. 364.

       Why is the promise of the resurrection of the dead so important
       to us, particularly as Seventh-day Adventists? How does our
       understanding of the state of the dead help us see even more
       clearly just how fundamental this teaching is? See also what Paul
       in 1 Corinthians 15 says about how crucial this doctrine is. Why
       do Paul's words make sense only if we understand that the dead
       now sleep?


                                                                             107
          WEDNESDAY December 22


      The Sealed Book Is Opened (Dan. 12:4, 9,10).
Read Daniel 12:4, 9,10. Taken together, what are these texts saying about
      the book of Daniel?


         For long centuries, many of the prophecies of Daniel were hidden in
      obscurity. This is not surprising, either, considering the contents of the
      book, particularly in regard to what it says about Rome, the one power that
      for centuries controlled access to the Bible.
         However, since the time of the Protestant Reformation, and especially
      in the past few hundred years, more and more students have come to
      understand better the book of Daniel. The closed is now, more and more,
      opened. What makes it easier, too, is that living after many of these events
      unfolded, Bible students are able to look back over history and see just
      how these things happened, as predicted, an advantage that only those liv-
      ing at "the time of the end" could have.
        "Since 1798 the book of Daniel has been unsealed, knowledge of the
      prophecies has increased, and many have proclaimed the solemn message
      of the judgment near."—Ellen G. White, The Great Controversy, p. 356.
      Of course, not everyone will understand. It's sad that so much of the
      Protestant world applies key prophecies of Daniel to Antiochus
      Epiphanes in the second century B.C., which is rather ridiculous, consid-
      ering Daniel's emphasis on "the time of the end."

Read John 14:29. What did Jesus say that helps us understand why
      Daniel was told to shut up the book until the end?




        In so many ways, the book of Daniel is a faith-affirming book. We,
      today, can look back and see how, just as predicted, nations came and
      went, one after another. The book appeals to our rational thought
      processes in ways that other books don't. After all, the Lord, through the
      book of Daniel, has given us prophecies based on something as large and
      unchangeable as world history. We can be as sure of the prophecies as we
      can be of world history. In short, for those who will, by faith, let Daniel
      speak to them, the book will give them powerful assurances of God's
      power and promises.

       What's your favorite prophecy in the book of Daniel? Which one
       does the most to help strengthen your faith? If you had the oppor-
       tunity to give a non-Christian a Bible study from only one
       prophecy in the book, which one would you choose, and why?

108
            THURSDAY December 23


     Blessed Is He Who Waits (Dan. 12:11-13).
At the end of the book we find two time prophecies (the 1,290 and
     1,335 days), which some Adventists set as literal days in the near
     future. What evidence in Scripture shows that these time prophecies
     are past?


        First, we need to recognize that the angel's long discourse in Daniel 11
     concludes in Daniel 12:4. Daniel 12:5-13 is an epilogue to the long vision
     in Daniel 11 and, in a sense, to the whole book, as well. It is not a new
     vision with a different topic but an explanation of certain elements in the
     visions contained in "the book," which is to be sealed. This is evident
     from the question in Daniel 12:6, " 'How long shall the fulfillment of
     these wonders be?' " (NKIV). The expression "these wonders" refers to
     the things Daniel saw in chapter 11, which itself is simply an elaboration
     of the issues in chapter 8.
        Second, the phrase "time and times and half a time" (NK.B0, in Daniel
     7:25 and 12:7, refers to one event, not two. In Daniel 7:25 the saints are
     given into the hand of the little-horn power " 'for a time, times and half
     a time' " (NIV), and in 12:7 the holy people's power is shattered for " 'a
     time, times and half a time' " (NIV). These phrases refer to the same
     thing, the persecution of God's people during the 1,260 years.
        Third, there's the taking away of the daily in Daniel 8:11, 11:31, and
     12:11. Because in Daniel 8:11 and 11:31 the taking away of the daily
     refers to a past historical reality, the taking away of the daily in Daniel
     12:11 is surely talking about the same thing.
        For these reasons, and others, such as Ellen White's statement that after
     1844, "there can be no definite tracing of prophetic time" (Ellen G.
     White, Manuscript 59, 1900), we reject attempts to give these time
     prophecies a future fulfillment. They belong to the past.
        One interpretation common among Seventh-day Adventists is this:
      A.D. 508 was the year in which Clovis, king of the Franks, stepped into
      the strategic position of the first civil power to join up with the rising
      Church of Rome. This laid the foundation for that centuries-long union
      of church and state, the abomination of desolation in Daniel 12:11. This
      was also the time in which many doctrines and practices that obscured
      Christ's high-priestly ministry became established in the church. Adding
      1,290 years to 508 leads to 1798. Meanwhile, the 1,335 years starts from
      the same point (508), which then leads to 1843, "a significant date in the
      relationship to the great advent awakening."—The SDA Bible
      Commentary, vol. 4, p. 881; see also Friday's section.

       Read Daniel 12:13. Look at the assurance Daniel was given about
       his eternal destiny.What Bible texts give you just as much assur-
       ance as Daniel was given here?

                                                                            109
                    FRIDAY December 24


Further Study: Read Ellen G. White, Testimonies to Ministers,
pp. 112-119.

         "I saw that God was in the proclamation of the time in 1843. It was His
      design to arouse the people and bring them to a testing point, where they
      should decide for or against the truth. Ministers were convinced of the
      correctness of the positions taken on the prophetic periods, and some
      renounced their pride, and left their salaries and their churches to go forth
      from place to place to give the message."—Ellen G. White, Early
      Writings, p. 232.
         "Again they were led to their Bibles to search the prophetic periods. The
      hand of the Lord was removed from the figures, and the mistake was
      explained. They saw that the prophetic periods reached to 1844, and that
      the same evidence which they had presented to show that the prophetic
      periods closed in 1843, proved that they would terminate in 1844. Light
      from the Word of God shone upon their position, and they discovered a
      tarrying time—`Though it [the vision] tarry, wait for it.' In their love for
      Christ's immediate coming, they had overlooked the tarrying of the
      vision, which was calculated to manifest the true waiting ones. Again they
      had a point of time. Yet I saw that many of them could not rise above their
      severe disappointment to possess that degree of zeal and energy which
      had marked their faith in 1843."—Page 236.

Discussion Questions:
    0 What dangers do we face by setting dates for future end-time
       events? What happens to the faith of many when these predicted
       events fail to come to pass?

          Daniel ends with the promise of victory for God's people. How,
       by dwelling on these prophecies, can your faith and hope be
       strengthened?

Summary: Though some parts of the book of Daniel remain a mystery,
      we have been given enough to trust in God who, through Jesus Christ, has
      assured us that, along with Daniel, we, too, will stand in our "lot at the
      end of the days."




110
                             INSIDES
                                                              tor)/
Called to Fail?
N'drin Charles
   I joined the Adventist Church while studying at a university in Cote
d'Ivoire, West Africa. Soon after my baptism I began having Sabbath
problems, and I could not complete one of my classes; I would have to
take the class again the next year.
   My parents were upset that I had let my faith get in the way of my stud-
ies, and they refused to pay my school fees after that. But I was determined
to return to school and show my parents that my faith had not made me
fail. The Lord blessed me, and I remained in school even without my par-
ents' support.
   As final exams approached, I prayed that God would help me do well
and bring glory to His name. But just before exams the faculty went on
strike and school closed. Some weeks later we were called back to take our
exams.
   The exam schedule indicated that my exams began on Tuesday, so I
spent Monday reviewing. But Monday evening a friend came and asked
why I had not attended two of my exams that day. To my dismay, I learned
that the exam schedule had been revised after I had checked it. Missing the
exams meant I had failed my courses.
   "I have failed again!" I told God. "How can this bring honor to Your
 name?"
    Later my pastor visited me and asked whether I would consider study-
 ing for the ministry. Other church members had asked me the same ques-
 tion, and I began to understand that perhaps God was opening another
 door for me.
    I prayed to know God's will, and some weeks later, to my surprise, the
 church agreed to sponsor me to study at the Adventist seminary.
    Before leaving to study, I asked God for two things: to continue provid-
 ing throughout my studies, and to sustain me morally and physically to
 God's glory. God answered both of these prayers, and I graduated cum
 laude in three years instead of the usual four.
    God fulfilled His promise that says, "If you put your trust in Me and
 walk before me, you will not be the last, but the first. You will not be the
 tail but the head." My parents, who once refused to pay my school fees,
 witnessed my graduation and gave honor to God for what He was doing in
 my life.
    I urge believers to look to God when facing problems in their lives. Trust
 Him; He will never fail.

N'drin Charles is the coordinator of Global Mission and Gospel Outreach programs for the
Cote d'Ivoire-Guinea Mission .


Produced by the General Conference Sabbath School and Personal Ministries Dept.
Email:gomission@gc.adventist.org                                              II I
2005 Bible Study Guide, for the First Quarter

      The main focus of this Bible Study Guide, His Wondrous Cross: The Story
      of Our Redemption, by Brian D. Jones, will be on the final week of
      Christ's life, which culminated in His death and resurrection. Next, we
      focus on the meaning of the Cross, on what happened there, and what it
      offers us, who claim it as the foundation of our salvation.

Lesson 1—The Provocation and Provision

        The Week at a Glance
        SUNDAY: To Love God (Matt. 22:37).
        MONDAY: Satan's Defection (John 8:44).
        TUESDAY: Satan's Earthly Exile (Rev. 12:4-9).
        WEDNESDAY: "Ayechah"? (Gen. 3:6-23).
        THURSDAY: God's Intervention and Gospel Foreshadowed
                  (Gen. 3:15).

        Memory Text—Genesis 3:9.

      Sabbath Gem: "Why, in order to love God, must we be free? Why
      must freedom entail the possibility to do wrong? How did God respond
      to the fall of Adam and Eve?"

Lesson 2—His Glorious Purpose Foreshadowed in Types

        The Week at a Glance
        SU NDAY: The Sin Crisis.
        MONDAY: The Sin Crisis, Continued (1 John 5:19).
        TUESDAY: Cain and Abel (Gen. 4:1-8).
        WEDNESDAY: Abraham and Calvary (Gen. 22:1-19, Gal. 3:8).
        THURSDAY: The Serpent in the Wilderness (Num. 21:4-9).

        Memory Text        —Genesis 22:8.
      Sabbath Gem: This week we look at those who were living in the
      shadows that were created only because the light was there to begin
      with. Before Calvary, the Lord was teaching His people truths about
      what God would do to save the world from sin.


          Lessons for the Visually Impaired The regular Adult
          Sabbath School Bible Study Guide is available free each month in
          braille and on audiocassette to sight-impaired and physically handi-
          capped persons who cannot read normal ink print. This includes indi-
          viduals who, because of arthritis, multiple sclerosis, paralysis, acci-
          dent, and so forth, cannot hold or focus on normal ink-print publica-
          tions. Contact Christian Record Services, Box 68506-0097.

112
dult Bible Study Companion Guide, 4th quarter 2004


                                   Daniel: The Seer of Babylon

                                                                                          —I

                                             THE SEER                    OF B A BYLON




                                               GERHARD PFANDL




      ere comes the Judge! That's the message of Daniel in this new commentary by biblical
   Hscholar Gerhard Pfandl. The author sets us down in once-mighty Babylon. We survey the
   ruins of the large banquet hall of Belshazzar and the remains of Nebuchadnezza's statue on
   the plain of Dura. We relive Daniel's immortal stories of heroic faith and remember God's
   promise: "When you walk through the fire, you shall not be bunted, nor shall the flame scorch you."
       But more important, Pfandl provides the keys to unlock Daniel's prophecy of the 2300 days.
   the 70 weeks, and the 1260/1335 days. The author champions the historicist year/day principle,
   showing how Daniel unfolds the future in symbol. lie explains how the medieml apostasy
   predicted by Daniel birthed a persecuting power whose false teaching obscures the atoning
   sacrifice of Christ. l le cites non-Adventist scholars who affirm that Daniel 8 teaches a pre-Advent
   judgment, and refutes Adventist innovators who project the 1260 days into the future.
       As the end rushes toward us, Daniel points forward to the day when David's prayer "Judge
   me. 0 Lord" is answered, and trial and trouble are swallowed up in glory.
                                                               Paperback         0-8280-1929 4           USS9.99. CanS14.99


     Review and Herald. Publishing                                    jak Itt Visit your local Adventist Book Center'
       {((trig 016Prepior try                                         mir.9 •     t-800-165-6955
                                                                      vvtel' • www.AdventistBookCenter.com.
              •        •      a        •
                                                            R. and avaitabddy Subplot to ottango Pooled in U.S.A. Add 051 to Canada.
                                                                Mission Projects
                                                                1 Churches in two cities in eastern Ukraine
                                                                2 Dormitory for Ukrainian Adventist Institute of Arts and Sciences
          Iloc   be.,
                                              Barents Sea
                                                                3 Churches in Moscow and St. Petersburg, Russian Federation

                                                                 Unions                     Churches Companies Members Population
                                                                 Caucasus                         137      96     9,862     34,626,450
    BELARU,                                                      East Russian Union Mission       206      77    16,399     31,001,300
                                                                 Moldova Union Conference         136     103    11,513      4,253,000
UKRAINE                                                          Southern Union Conference        104      71     7,167     57,769,000
                        Moscow                                   Ukrainian Union Conference       844     373    61,086     47,793,000
                                                                 West Russian Union Conference    429     315    35,528     96,031,250
MOLDOVA                                                          Belarus Conference                60      13     4,561      9,873,000

                                                                 Total (as of 6/30/03)           1,916   1,048   146,116   281,347.000




   GEORGIA

ARMENIA

          RBAI JAN                   KAZAKHSTAN




                                 UZBEKISTAN   1\
    TURKMENISTAN
                                      TAJIKISTAN            KYRGYZSTAN
